ELSEVIER Artificial Intelligence 103 (I 998) 347-356 Artificial Intelligence Creativity and artificial intelligence Margaret A. Boden Abstract Creativity is a fundamental can be used to create new ideas in three ways: by producing novel combinations of familiar by exploring generation of previously new ideas than in automating their evaluation. 0 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. feature of human intelligence, and a challenge for AI. AI techniques ideas; the the generation of transformations in modelling ideas. AI will have less difficulty the potential of conceptual spaces; and by making that enable impossible 1. Why AI must try to model creativity Creativity is a fundamental feature of human oriented AI cannot for AI. Even technologically very useful in the laboratory or the market-place. And AI-models as part of cognitive human minds to be creative. science can help psychologists intelligence, and an inescapable ignore it, for creative programs could be intended to understand how it is possible (or considered) challenge for Creativity is not a special “faculty”, nor a psychological property confined Rather, it is a feature of human intelligence such as the association of ideas, reminding, a structured problem-space, dimension linked to cultural context and personality primarily on the cognitive dimension. and reflective self-criticism. (the generation of new ideas) but also motivation in general. It is grounded perception, to a tiny elite. in everyday capacities analogical searching thinking, It involves not only a cognitive and emotion, and is closely focus factors [3]. Current AI models of creativity A creative idea is one which is novel, surprising, useful, .). But “novel” has two importantly different senses here. The idea may be novel beautiful. concerned or, so far as we with respect only to the mind of the individual know, to the whole of previous history. The ability to produce novelties of the former kind may be called P-creativity (H for historical). P-creativity is the more fundamental notion, of which H-creativity the latter H-creativity (P for psychological), is a special case. (or AI-system) and valuable (interesting, 00043702/98/$ -see front matter 0 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. HI: SOOO4-3702(98)00055- 1 348 A4.A. Buden /Artijicial Intelli~enc-e 103 (1998) 347-356 AI should concentrate primarily on P-creativity. then artificial H-creativity will occur in some cases-indeed, to model this in a powerful manner, it already has, as we shall see. (In what follows, I shall not use the letter-prefixes: usually, it is P-creativity which is at issue.) If it manages 2. Three types of creativity There are three main types of creativity, the novel ideas. Each of the three results in surprises, but only one (the third) can lead to the “shock’ idea [2]. All types include some H-creative of surprise that greets an apparently examples, but the creators celebrated in the history books are more often valued for their achievements in respect of the third type of creativity. involving different ways of generating impossible The first type involves novel (improbable) creativity. Examples associated of familiar combinations include much poetic ideas share some two newly call this “combinational” analogy-wherein conceptual the structure. Analogies are sometimes explored and developed at some length, for purposes of an apt of rhetoric or problem-solving. analogy the similarities of structure are not only noticed but are judged in terms of their strength and depth. But even the mere generation, or appreciation, involves a (not necessarily conscious) structural mapping, whereby judicious inherent ideas. Let us imagery, and also see, however, (“ideas”) that they satisfy linked, and more similar and “transformational” the generation of novel ideas by the exploration of structured conceptual to each other than creativity. The former spaces. that are not only novel, but unexpected. One can The second and third types are closely either is to the first. They are “exploratory” involves This often results in structures concerned. immediately The latter involves of the space, so that new structures can be generated which could not have arisen before. The more the more the dimension concerned, and the more powerful the transformation, fundamental surprising the new ideas will be. These two forms of creativity shade into one another, since exploration of the space can include minimal “tweaking” of fairly superficial constraints. The distinction between a tweak and a transform is to some extent a matter of judgement, but the more well-defined of some (one or more) dimension the canons of the thinking-style the transformation the space, the clearer this distinction can be. (for example) most professional respected living out of exploratory Many human beings-including a justly inherit an accepted and jazz-musicians-make is, they and perhaps superficially But human beings sometimes removing one (or more) of its dimensions, enables impossible. transform tweak ideas to be generated which (relative style of thinking it, to explore scientists, artists, creativity. That it, their culture, and then search from its contents, boundaries, and potential. the accepted conceptual space, by altering or or by adding a new one. Such transformation space) were previously to that conceptual The more fundamental the transformation, and/or the more fundamental the dimension the more different that is transformed, of amazement that attends such (previously surprise occasioned by mere improbabilities, the newly-possible impossible) structures will be. The shock ideas is much greater than the they may be. If the however unexpected the richness of human them in M.A. &den /Artificial Intelligence 103 (1998) 347-356 349 are too extreme, apparent. transformations be immediately likely rejected. Indeed, it may take some time for the relation between recognized and generally accepted. the relation between the old and new spaces will not and very the two spaces to be In such cases, the new structures will be unintelligible, 3. Computer models of creativity Computer models of creativity creativity focussed on the second that exploratory considerable domain-expertise place, and to specify procedures and transformational (exploratory) include examples of all three types. As yet, those type are the most successful. That’s not to say requires and analytic power to define the conceptual space in the first is easy to reproduce. On the contrary, it typically that enable its potential to be explored. But combinational creativity are even more elusive. The reasons for this, in brief, are the difficulty of approaching associative memory, and the difficulty of identifying our values and of expressing computational creativity. The latter difficulty attends efforts directed at any type of creativity, but is especially problematic with respect to the third (see Section 4, below). form. The former difficulty bedevils attempts to simulate combinational Combinational creativity Both of these require some sort of semantic network, or inter-linked knowledge-base, their ground. Clearly, pulling association may not be telling, or appropriate than “free association”, Ideally, every product of the combinational the originality of the various combinations is studied in AI by research on (for instance) jokes and analogy. as random associations out of such a source is simple. But an tasks other too. apt, and program should be at least minimally should be assessable by the AI-system. the nature and structure of the associative in context. For all combinational linkage is important for producing punning A recent, and relatively successful, example of AI-generated Jape, a program general sentence-forms, kind of X has Y?; What kind of X can Y?; What’s a Y? The semantic network used by the program semantics, syntax, and spelling. Different combinations in distinctly is jokes based on nine [I]. Jape produces such as: What do you get when you cross X with Y?; What the difference between an X and incorporates knowledge of phonology, of these aspects of words are used. structured ways, for generating each joke-type. (combinational) humour riddles Examples of riddles generated by Jape include: (Q) What kind of murderer has fibre? (A) A cereal killer; (Q) What do you call a strange market? (A) A bizarre bazaar; (Q) What do you call a depressed and (Q) What’s the difference between leaves and a car? (A) One you brush and rake, the other you rush and brake. These may in a relaxed social setting, one or two not send us into paroxysms of laughter-although, of them might. But they are all amusing enough to prompt wryly appreciative groans. train? (A) A low-comotive; series of psychological Binsted did a systematic tests, comparing people’s reception of Jape’s riddles with their response in joke-books. She also compared Jape’s products with “non-jokes” generated by random combinations. She found, that children, by whom such humour distinguish generally is most appreciated, Jape’s riddles) and non-jokes. Although than Jape’s, this difference vanishes for instance, reliably between jokes (including can they if Jape’s find human-originated to human-originated jokes published jokes funnier 350 M.A. Boden /Art$cial Intelligence 103 (1998) 347-356 output is pruned, SO as to omit the items generated by the least successful schemata. The riddles published are highly selected, for only those the author finds reasonably in human joke-books funny will appear in print. Binsted had set herself a challenging that every one of Jape’s jokes research showed that although none were regarded as would be amusing. Her follow-up exceptionally funny, very few produced no response at all. This contrasts with some other Al-models of creativity, such as AM [ 161, where a high proportion of the newly generated structures are not thought interesting by human beings. task: to ensure is meant true if the system to be used interactively It does not follow that all Al-modelling them to think about ideas that otherwise of creativity should emulate Binsted’s ambition. by human beings, they products should in any case be allowed, ideas. Jape’s and generative schemata are very limited. in Jape, future. To these aspects so as to produce jokes that are reliably funny would raise thorny This is especially to help their own creativity by prompting might not have considered. Some “unsuccessful” as even human creators often produce second-rate, success is due to the fact that its joke-templates Binsted identifies a number of aspects of real-life riddles which are not parallelled and whose (reliably incorporate questions of evaluation or even inappropriate, in the foreseeable (see Section 4). is not possible implementation funny) As for AI-models of analogy, most of these generate and evaluate analogies by using (e.g. [7,12,13]). The rules, applied concepts to prestructured domain-genera1 mapping creators of some of these models have compared experiments, approach a concept and its mapping onto some other concept. The two concepts remain unchanged by the analogy. claiming a significant amount of evidence there is a clear distinction between [8]. In these models, them with the results of psychological in support of their domain-general the representation of involved usually of analogy Some AI-models allow for a more flexible is the Copycat program, a broadly connectionist [ 11,181. Copycat’s of concepts. representation for system One example are context- concepts analogies and “klmmno”. The two m’s in the sensitive descriptions first string just listed will be described by Copycat as a pair, but those in the second string will be described as the end-points of two different letter-strings of strings such as “mmpprr” that looks alphabetic between triplets. One might rather say that Copycat will “eventually” describe them in these ways. For that seeing a new analogy is much the same as perceiving its concepts evolve as processing proceeds. This research assumption way. So Copycat does not rely on ready-made, in a context-sensitive way: new analogies and new perceptions develop built description and and developed an alternative begun which exploits different aspects. The model allows a wide range of (more or less daring) analogies to be generated, and evaluated. The degree to which the analogies are obvious or far-fetched can be altered by means of one of the system- parameters. is guided by the theoretical in a new something its own but constructs together. A part- is maintained, that seems to be mapping well onto the nascent analogy further. One that seems to be heading for a dead end is abandoned, fixed, representations, Whether the approach used in Copycat is preferable general) mapping for assuming is controversial. Hofstadter that concepts are unchanging to the more usual forms of (domain- [ 1 l] criticizes other AI-models of analogy that the and for guaranteeing and inflexible, M.A. Boden /Artificial Intelligence 103 (1998) 347-356 351 required analogy having the requisite conceptual rebut these charges [8]. (among others) will be found by focussing on small representations structures and mapping rules built in. The opposing camp (SME), the representation-building just such an analysis, describing process which must be analytically They argue that to identify analogical is to use a vague and misleading metaphor: They point out that the most detailed published thinking with high-level perception, as Hofstadter is analogical mapping, distinguished they insist, from conceptual account of Copycat procedures as modules. They report used on for instance, that are “very large” as compared with Copycat’s, some of which were purposes. They compare Copycat’s alphabetic does, a domain-general representation. [ 181 provides distinct from, though interacting with, the representation-comparing that the Structure Mapping Engine representations built by other systems microworld with the “blocks world” of 1970s scene analysis, which the interesting complexity did not allow for changes to work on learning projection, and re-representation psychological there is evidence depends on psychological those involved The jury ignored most of their early models they refer inference [9]. Moreover (as remarked above), they claim that their they say in which one is reminded of an (absent) analog, from structure as a result of analogising, (using SME) involving processes of schema abstraction, processes, and kinds of similarity, that are presented simultaneously. (and noise) in conceptual in the real-world. Although to simulation. For example, it may not be necessary that memory access, in mapping between can be successfully for independent their approach two analogs experiments significantly different support remains out on this dispute. However, for either side. My hunch is that the Copycat approach to plump is much closer principles of analogy thinking. But domain-general important. And these are presumably enriched by many domain-specific of human absolutely to the fluid complexity are probably processes. (Certainly, psychological analogies are likely to be helpful.) highly complex matter. studies of how human beings retrieve and interpret In short, even combinational creativity is, or can be, a The exploratory and AI-systems. For conceptual described by computational transformational types of creativity spaces, and ways of exploring and modifying concepts. can also be modelled by them, can be Occasionally. a “creative” program is said to apply to a wide range of domains, or useful spaces-as EURISKO. in a particular area, such as genetic specialist knowledge has to be provided to merely boring) (as opposed conceptual program considerable nonsensical a representation processes, at least on the part of someone with whom he cooperates. subject-bounded interdisciplinarity.) conceptual domain-expertise requires considerable of an interesting institutional for instance, does [16]. But to make this generalist or VLSI-design, engineering ideas. In general, providing if it is not to generate hosts of a program with exploratory space, and with appropriate on the part of the programmer-or (Unfortunately, structure of most universities works against the highly this sort of For example, EMI (experiments that composes in the styles of Mozart, Stravinsky, Joplin, and others [6]. In order to do this, it employs powerful musical grammars expressed as ATNs. In addition, it uses lists of “signatures”: melodic, harmonic, metric, and ornamental motifs characteristic of individual composers. is a program intelligence) in musical 352 MA. Boden /Artificial Intelligence 103 (1998) 347-356 Using general near-identical individual composing rules to a signature styles. to vary and intertwine these, it often composes that has nut been provided. This suggests a systematicity a musical phrase in to other types of music the lack of expressiveness, the technique can be applied and the quality of the synthesized such as harmony and rhythm, and of musical conventions Individual musical style has been addressed also in a pioneering program that improvises [lo]. The jazz in the style of Charlie Parker- sound) jazz in real time, though most highly developed version, at present, generates and (ignoring it actually sounds like Parker. Besides strong (and relatively general) knowledge of musical dimensions of jazz, the system has access to a large set of Parker-specific motifs, which can be varied and combined in a number of ways. (The programmer without strong musical skills, he would not be able to identify the aptness of specific processes program often originates their own performance. However, its creativity the relevant motifs, or judge space, the can exploit in in its present form it never moves outside Parker-space: is merely exploratory, not transformational. ideas, which jazz-professionals for using them.) In exploring interesting musical is an accomplished jazz-saxophonist: this conceptual characteristic Architectural design, too, has been formally modelled. For instance, a shape-grammar falls within the genre. The grammar not only architectural of the relevant In a Prairie house, the addition of a balcony (exploratory- the crucial space, but also shows which are relatively describing Frank Lloyd Wright’s Prairie houses generates all the ones he designed, as well as others he did not [14]. To the initiated eye, every one of these novel creative) structures dimensions fundamental. a decision on which nothing else (except the appearance and ornamentation depends. By contrast, because many design-decisions fireplace. Exploring rise to surprises more fundamental of the balcony) in overall structural change, follow, and depend upon, the (early) decision about the then, can give this space by making different choices about fireplaces, than can adding balconies the “addition” of a fireplace in unexpected places. is stylistically superficial, identifies results for it is Perhaps the best-known is AARON, a program-or rather, a example of AI-creativity line-drawing exploring in particular styles [ 171 and, more recently, also [5]. Written by Harold Cohen, an artist who was already an acclaimed in the 1960s AARON explores a space defined with the help of rich domain- series of programs-for colouring professional expertise. AARON is not focussed primarily on surfaces, but generates some representation of it. Versions that can draw many in galleries worldwide. Until very recently, coloured a 3D-core, and then draws a line around idiosyncratic portraits use 900 control points to specify the 3D-core, of which 300 specify the structure pleasing, and have been of the face and head. The program’s drawings are aesthetically images of AARON’s work exhibited that can were hand-painted do this itself. It chooses colours by tonality it can decide to concentrate on a particular the paper by applying but colours characteristic the dyes and painting-blocks AARON, painting-AARON family of hues. It draws outlines using a paintbrush, sizes. Some five round “paint-blocks” style are due to the physical properties of their use. Like drawing- by Cohen. But in 1995, he exhibited a version of AARON (light/dark) rather than to the program guiding is still under continuous development. features of the resulting painting rather than hue, although of differing M.A. Boden / Artijicial Intelligence IO3 (I 998) 347-356 353 The drawings (and paintings) are individually unpredictable because of random choices, but all the drawings produced by a given version of AARON will have the same style. AARON cannot reflect on its own productions, nor adjust them so as to make them better. It cannot even transform its conceptual space, leaving aside the question of whether this results in something “better”. In this, it resembles most current AI-programs focussed on creativity. A further example of exploratory AI-creativity is the BACON suite designed to model the data are deliberately scientific discovery programmed, and provided. New types of discovery are impossible to name such programs after scientists remembered noticed before. Even the notion that there may be (for instance) some linear mathematical relation [15]. The heuristics used by the BACON system are carefully pre- the heuristics for BACON. It is therefore misleading relations of a type never to be found was a huge creative leap. so as to suit prestructured for noticing Almost all of today’s “creative” computers spaces. They may allow are concerned only with exploring pre- but no tweaking, defined conceptual fundamental novelties or truly shocking surprises are possible. However, a few AI-systems attempt not only to explore space but also to transform for highly constrained their conceptual it, sometimes in relatively unconstrained ways. Transformational systems include AM and EURISKO on genetic algorithms. Some of these have produced valued structures experts say they could never have produced unaided: example, has generated 3D-forms of a type which he could not have himself [22]. [ 161, and certain programs based that the human for for the sculptor William Latham, imagined Most GA-programs only explore a pre-given it. But some also within fundamental way. For example, GA-work the conceptual space, resulting transform space, seeking their generative mechanism location in a more or less tweaking of in graphics may enable superficial in images which, although novel, clearly belong to the same the “optimal” family as those which went before [22]. Or it may allow the core of the image-generating code to be lengthened images may bear no family- so that the novel and complexified, resemblance even to their parents, still less to their more remote ancestors [21]. Similarly, some work in evolutionary robotics has generated novel sensory-motor anatomies and control systems as a result of GAS that allow the length of the “genome” to be altered [4]. One should not assume that transformation is always creative, or even-in the present state of the art-that AI-systems cannot. Significantly, some AI-modellers deliberately that can transform their rules are superior to those which the their programs avoid giving to change the heart of the code. That is, they prevent fundamental capacity in the conceptual tweaking. One space, allowing only exploration and relatively superficial reason for this is the human may be more interested, at least for a time, in exploring a transformations given space than in transforming it in unpredictable ways. A professional sculptor such as Latham, for instance, may wish to explore the potential (and limits) of one particular family of 3D-structures, rampant transformation before considering in AI-models of creativity is the difficulty of automating evaluation. [ 221. Another for avoiding reason others 354 M.A. l&h /Art@ial Intrlligence 103 (1998) 347-356 4. The evaluation of new ideas A main reason why most current AI-models of creativity attempt only exploration, not then the resulting structures may not have transformation, any interest or value. Such ideas are novel, certainly, but not creative. (We saw in Section 1 that “creativity” is that if the space is transformed implies positive evaluation.) This would not matter and drop (or amend) the transformation if the AI-system were able to realize new constructions, AI-creator would have evaluative mechanisms this is very rarely so (an exception evolves alongside involved more useless items than powerful mathematical of “interestingness” And some “adventurously” the evaluation being done interactively by human beings [2 11. the poor quality of the accordingly. A truly automatic to do this. At present, in which the fitness function [19]). Notoriously, AM produced many it did have heuristics ideas, and although built into it, its evaluations were often mistaken by human standards. programs embody no evaluative criteria at all, is artificial co-evolution sufficiently powerful the several species transformational in principle why future AI-models to allow them to transform (including H-creative) ways. But for such computerized to be the programmers must be able to express the values concerned sufficiently clearly being represented There is no reason criteria powerful enough creative possible, for them to be implemented. Even if the values are not predetermined, instead as an evolving recognized by the (GA) system. should not embody evaluative spaces in fruitfully self-criticism the relevant features must be implemented their conceptual fitness function, in and To some extent, this can be achieved space so successfully conceptual will be accepted by humans as valuable transformed implicit within the original space, or previously provided spaces will need types of evaluation different that any structure implicitly, a culturally by defining accepted that can be generated by the program [5,14]. But the structures generated within newly (at least in part) from those in explicit form. It is even more difficult to express (verbally or computationally) just what it is that we than it is to recognize something as like about a Bach fugue, or an impressionist painting, an acceptable member of one of those categories. And to say what it is that we like (or even dislike) about a new, or previously unfamiliar, is even more challenging. form of music or painting Identifying the criteria we use in our evaluations our reliance on those criteria (causally) explaining, just why we like or dislike something will often have a lot to do with motivational to say. emotional factors-considerations is hard enough. Justifying, or even is more difficult still. For example, and about which current Al has almost nothing therefore To make matters worse, human values-and prepared to approve as “creative”+hange In some cases, industry, value-shifts ignored and/or criticized they do so in unpredictable for example, or of rogue memes the novelties which we are from culture to culture, and from time to time. think of the fashion- baseball-cap. Nor are like the back-to-front to trivial cases such as these: even Bach, Mozart, and Donne were and irrational ways: in certain periods. confined The scientific criteria of theoretical elegance and coherence, and of experimental verification, are less variable than artistic values. But that’s not to say they are easy to M.A. Boden /Artijicial Intelligence 103 (1998) 347-356 355 define, or to implement. has been made by the BACON team.) (An attempt to do so, for certain sorts of mathematical symmetry, Moreover, too has its equivalent of fad and fashion. Even event, but the culmination science dinosaurs was not a cut-and-dried and political-nationalistic-negotiation lasting for several years [20]. The important point is that what scientists count as “creative”, and what they call a “discovery”, depends largely of various kinds. These social on unarticulated in AI-models. evaluations are often invisible to scientists. For sure, they are not represented of a process of scientific- social considerations the discovery of including values, 5. Conclusion Some H-creative merely exploratory just beginning. ideas have already been generated by AI-programs, (or combinational) procedures. Transformational AI-originality though usually by is only The two major bottlenecks are: (1) domain-expertise, which is required for mapping explored and/or transformed; and the conceptual space that is to be (2) valuation of the results, which is especially necessary-and especially difficult-for transformational programs. These two bottlenecks expertise. Valuation, the program, or interactively critically transformation. judge interact, thus far, is mostly since subtle valuation implicit domain requires considerable in the generative procedures used by can ideas, And hardly any can combine evaluation with imposed by a human being. Only a few AI-models their own original The ultimate vindication of AI-creativity would be a program that generated novel ideas which initially perplexed or even repelled us, but which was able to persuade us that they were indeed valuable. We are a very long way from that. References [ 11 K. Binsted, Machine humour: an implemented model of puns, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Edinburgh, 1996. 121 M.A. Boden, The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, Basic Books, New York, 1990. [3] M.A. Boden (Ed.), Dimensions of Creativity, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994. (41 D. Cliff, I. Harvey, P Husbands, Explorations [51 H. Cohen, The further exploits of AARON, painter, of Intelligence and the Humanities, Special edition of Stanford Humanities Review 4 (2) robotics, Adaptive Behavior 2 (1993) 71-108. in: S. Franchi, Cl. Guzeldere (Eds.), Constructions in evolutionary the Mind: Artificial (1995) pp. 141-160. 161 D. Cope, Computers and Musical Style, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1991. 171 K.D. Forbus, D. Gentner, K. Law, MACIFAC: A model of similarity-based retrieval, Cognitive Science 119 (1994) 141-205. 181 K.D. Forbus, D. Gentner, A.B. Markman, R.W. Ferguson, Analogy a domain-general press, approach to analogical mapping is right, Journal of Experimental just looks like high level perception: why and Theoretical AI, in 191 D. Gentner, S. Brem, R.W. Ferguson, A.B. Markman, B.B. Levidow, P. Wolff. K.D. Forbus, Conceptual change via analogical press. reasoning: a case study of Johannes Kepler, Journal of the Learning Sciences, in 356 M.A. Boden /Art$cial Intelligence 103 (IYYX) 347-356 [IO] P. Hodgson, Modelling cognition in creative musical improvisation, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Sussex, in preparation. [ 1 l] D.R. Hofstadter, FARG (The fluid analogies research group), Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies: Computer Models of the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought, Basic Books, New York, 1995. 1121 K.J. Holyoak, P. Thagard, Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction, Cognitive Science 13 (1989) 29% 355. 1131 K.J. Holyoak, P. Thagard, Mental Leaps: Analogy in Creative Thought, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995. [ 141 H. Koning, J. Eizenberg, The language of the prairie: Frank Lloyd Wright’s prairie houses, Environment and Planning B 8 (1981) 295-323. [ 151 P. Langley, H.A. Simon, G.L. Bradshaw, J.M. Zytkow, Scientific Discovery: Computational Explorations of the Creative Process, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1987. [16] D.B. Lenat, The role of heuristics in learning by discovery: J.G. Carbonell, T.M. Mitchell (Eds.), Machine Learning: An Artificial Alto, CA, 1983, pp. 243-306. three case studies, in: R.S. Michalski, Intelligence Approach, Tioga, Palo [17] P. McCorduck, Aaron‘s Code, W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, CA, 1991. [ 181 M. Mitchell, Analogy-Making [19] T.S. Ray, An approach as Perception, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993. (Eds.), Artificial Life II, Addison Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1992, pp. 371408. Reprinted (Ed.), The Philosophy of Artificial Life, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1996, pp. 111-145. to the synthesis of life, in: C.G. Langton, C. Taylor, J. Doyne Farmer, S. Rasmussen in: M.A. Boden 1201 S. Schaffer, Making up discovery, in: M.A. Boden (Ed.), Dimensions of Creativity, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994, pp. 13-51. [21] K. Sims, Artificial evolution for computer graphics, Computer Graphics 25 (4) (1991) 319-328. 1221 S. Todd, W. Latham, Evolutionary Art and Computers, Academic Press, London, 1992. 