DOI: 10.1590/0100-6991e-20202530Original articleDevelopment and application of a swine model for trainingultrasonography-guided central venous access Desenvolvimento e aplicação de um modelo porcino para treinamento de acesso venoso central guiado por ultrassonografia Jackson Vinícius de Lima BertuoL1  ; natasha Lure Bueno camargo1; Fernando antonio campeLo spencer netto2; andré pereira WestphaLen, tcBc-pr1.A B S T R A C TIntroduction: simulation based teaching is a powerful tool in medical education, allowing hands on practice under a controlled environment and with repeated maneuvers. Central venous access venipuncture is one of the most frequent procedures carried out in the hospital setting, due to its various clinical indications and, when performed with the help of ultrasonography, the risk of adverse events is minimized. Aim: to develop, to describe and to test a porcine model that simulates the central venous access puncture aided by ultrasonography. Method: a low cost porcine model was developed to train medical students and residents on central venous access guided by ultrasonography. Both students and medical residents underwent a theoretical training regarding the model, followed by a hands-on training session. Afterwards, the participants assessed the model by answering a questionnaire. Results: there were 51 participants. The average score regarding the similarity between the model and the human anatomy was 9.15. When the characteristics were separately assessed, the mean scores regarding the similarity of the vessels, anatomic disposition and ultrasonographic characteristics as well as the venipuncture were, respectively, 9.27; 9.31; 9.54 and 8.86. Conclusion: The model was approved and considered appropriate for the training of central venous venipuncture by all the participants. Furthermore, it is a low cost, simple and reproducible model, that presents high similarity with the human anatomy. Therefore, it may be used as an aid to train people on ultrasonography guided central venous access.Keywords: Ultrassonography. Central Venous Catheters. Education, Medical. Simulation Technique.INTRODUCTIONSimulation-based teaching has become popular in training the skills of professionals in several areas, being a powerful learning tool in medicine. Simulation are infusion of medications, parenteral nutrition, dialysis therapy, invasive monitoring in critically ill patients, and others7,8. Despite being considered a low complexity procedure that every doctor must be qualified to perform, it is not free of complications, the most common being allows the practice of procedures in a controlled infections associated with catheters, arterial puncture, environment, in which error becomes an opportunity pneumothorax, hematomas and venous thrombosis. to improve learning, conferring greater autonomy to students and reducing risks to the patient1-4.Central venous access is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures in clinical practice, approximately 200,000 of these procedures being performed annually in England5, and five million in the USA6. There indications for a central venous access The number of punctures to obtain success is directly proportional to the rate of complications7-9, whose incidence increases six-fold when three or more attempts are required10. As for the puncture sites, there is a preference for the internal jugular and subclavian veins, due to the higher rates of complications of central venous access in the femoral vein7.1 - Western Parana State University, General Surgery Service, University Hospital of Western Parana - Cascavel - PR – Brazil 2 - Shouldice Hernia Hospital - Thornhill - Ontario - CanadaRev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202530 2Traditionally, central venous access has always OBJECTIVEbeen performed considering anatomical references. However, in the last 20 years, many studies have shown To develop and describe an inexpensive the benefits of using ultrasonography to guide the experimental model for central venous access simulation venipuncture. When aided by the ultrasonography, the guided by ultrasonography in the internal jugular vein, puncture is performed with visualization of the vessels to apply it to students, and to assess teaching of the through the sonographic image, reducing the number of necessary punctures and the complication rates5-13. This fact is observed independently of the chosen puncture site (internal jugular, subclavian or femoral), although most of the studies are for internal jugular vein11. In view of all the positive evidence favoring the eco-guided procedure and the resemblance to reality when using it.METHODSThe project was developed in the State University of Western Paraná (UNIOESTE) and in the puncture, in 2002, the National Institute for Clinical University Hospital of Western Paraná (HUOP), from Excellence (NICE) recommended in its guideline that November 2019 to February 2020, being approved by central venous access be carried out with the help of ultrasonography5. Several other organizations also issued this recommendation: American College of Surgeons, the institution’s ethics committee under the certificate of appreciation No. 23233819.2.0000.0107, and comprised three stages: model development, training session and College’s Committee on Perioperative Care, American application of the questionnaire, and data analysis.Society of Anesthesiologists, American Society of The study participants were interns from the Echocardiography, and Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality6.fifth and sixth years of medical school and resident doctors in the specialties of general surgery and internal Another factor that helps to reduce the medicine. Each participant signed an informed consent number of complications is training and experience term before the start of the training session.with the procedure. Professionals who have performed more than 50 central venous access have lower rates of complications than those who carried out less6,14. Thus, training in simulators is an attractive modality to Porcine modelWe used porcine parts in the manufacturing guarantee dexterity to the professional before exposure to patients6,10. Studies using medical education based on the simulation of central venous access have demonstrated of the models. We acquired them in a meat-marketing establishment duly regulated by the competent health surveillance institutions, and they were composed of greater operator comfort and better performance, skin, subcutaneous tissue and muscle of the animal’s both in simulation and in patient care in real medical practice15. Current simulation methods mostly comprise commercial mannequins mimicking human anatomy. abdominal region (pancetta). Each model was made with two parts, placed on top of each other, fixed to a rigid wooden surface, and interspersed with a Penrose drain However, the use of such technology in teaching is number two (mean diameter 12mm) for simulation of hindered by the high acquisition and maintenance costs of such equipment6,15. In addition, many models available on the market are not realistic enough and do not simulate the ultrasonography characteristics of human tissues6. To circumvent the problem in question, especially in countries with few resources available in the internal jugular vein, and a 20 french Kehr drain for simulation of the common carotid artery. We sought to maintain the same anatomical relationship between the in vivo structures – internal jugular vein lateral and slightly anterior to the common carotid artery (Figure 1).The Kehr drain was filled with a red dye the area of health and education, professionals working artificially colored solution with for blood simulation, in medical education have developed craft models for connected to a two-way connector equipment and training, based mainly on animal parts and ballistic gelatin6,15-18.coupled to a 10 mL syringe, which simulated arterial pulse by means of manual, intermittent pushing of the Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202530BertuolDevelopment and application of a swine model for training ultrasonography-guided central venous access 3plunger. The Penrose drain was also connected to a two-Training sessionway connector equipment, one of the ways was coupled to a 60 mL syringe, and the other, to a blood transfusion Each training session comprised groups of equipment and a 1,000 mL saline bottle. All the system interns or resident doctors, and was divided into the was filled with the same solution for blood simulation. following stages:We used the 60 mL syringe to suck the drain solution for 1. Theoretical discussion of the technique, simulation of hypovolemic states and also to retrieve any indications and complications of central venous air bubbles, while the connection to the bottle of solution access; was needed for replacing the volume lost by puncture 2. Theoretical and practical discussion of the holes, keeping the drain always full. In this way, we could technical and anatomical concepts of the use use the same drain several times. (Figure 2).ultrasonography to vessels punctures; 3. Practice of the echo-guided puncture in the porcine model, under supervision and critical and corrective analysis of the technique, when necessary; 4. Completion of the model evaluation questionnaire.The practice was performed according to the technique described in the article and educational video published by The New England Journal of Medicine19, and the training ultrasonography images were acquired with VScan™ GE® apparatus, using a linear transducer with frequency between 4 and 8 Mhz (Figure 3).The materials used for puncture were the same as those used in clinical practice to perform central venous access: 5 mL syringe and 18 GA needle.In addition to allowing echo-guided puncture, it was possible to complete the central venous access procedure: passage of a guidewire, dilator and catheter (Figure 4). For this study, however, we chose to evaluate only the puncture step.QuestionnaireThe evaluation questionnaire included epidemiological aspects of participants, previous training in central venous access with or without the aid of ultrasonography, adequacy of the model for training medical students and doctors, and importance of simulation models in medical education. Regarding the model, we requested evaluations in relation to its Figure 1. Placement of the drains on the porcine model.Figure 2. Composition of the model.The HUOP Laboratory of Medical Skills provided general similarity, to the similarity of the vessels image, all materials used but the porcine parts. There were no of the anatomical arrangement, of the ultrasonography incurred costs, since they were materials with validity characteristics, and of the puncture itself. All questions dates expired for use in clinical practice.varied in scores from zero to ten. The authors prepared Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202530BertuolDevelopment and application of a swine model for training ultrasonography-guided central venous access4the questionnaire, which did not undergo previous During the course of the study development validation.Figure 3. Ultrasonographic images of the venipuncture model. It is pos-sible to observe the anatomic relationship between the vessels, the ve-nous compression, the transversal and longitudinal venipuncture plane.Figure 4. Venipuncture, guide wire and double lumen catheter inser-tions.Data analysisphase, two medical experts with previous experience in eco-guided central venous access, a vascular surgeon and a intensive care physician, tested the model before applying it to students. Both approved it as a useful tool in training the procedure, and assigned a maximum score for all items, except for the similarity of the puncture, which received a score of eight by the vascular surgeon.The assembly of the model and its operation can be observed by viewing the following videos: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gHxiUDBUVe0 and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0q1f8i3MrP0.RESULTSThe research had 51 participants. Of these, 43 were medical graduates, and eight, resident doctors. As prior experience, most of the participants had performed between zero and less than five central accesses, and only eight had experience in performing the procedure with ultrasonography (Table 1).Table 1. Demographics and Training Level.Age - mean (range)26.03 (21 – 40)Gender - n (%)FemaleMaleGraduation Level - n (%)InternResidentExperience in central venous access - n (%)None0-56-10> 10USG experience - n (%)24 (47.05%)27 (52.4%)43 (84.31%)8 (15.68%)23 (45.09%)20 (39.21%)1 (1.96%)7 (13.72%)8 (15.68%)43 (84.31%)We loaded the data to Microsoft Excel® spreadsheets and analyzed them by means and percentage.YesNotRev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202530BertuolDevelopment and application of a swine model for training ultrasonography-guided central venous access Sample sizeVessel image - mean (SD)Anatomical arrangement - mean (SD)Sonographic characteristics - mean (SD)Puncture - mean (SD)Overall similarity - mean (SD)SD = standard deviation.Regarding the evaluation of the model’s quality and reduces risks to patients, in addition to providing the 5and similarity with clinical practice, the average general similarity score was 9.15. When divided by characteristics, the mean of the similarity scores of the vessels’ image, anatomical arrangement of the structures, sonographic characteristics, and puncture were, respectively, 9.27, 9.31, 9.54, and 8.86 (Table 2).Table 2. Evaluation of the model similarity.All participantsParticipants with previous experience in eco-guided puncture5189.27 (1.15)9.25 (0.88)correction of technical errors in a controlled environment, which allows for multiple iterations1-4. Moreover, that have been major advances in the development of models that simulate situations of actual medical practice21. Even so, many teaching centers are still based on the old methodology, mainly due to the lack of resources6,20. One way to get around this issue is the development of low-cost, handmade simulators, as described in this work.We developed a low-cost, simulation model of eco-guided central venous access, of which all materials but for porcine parts are available in a hospital environment, and that could simulate the main characteristics of the procedure in patients: relationship between the artery and vein similar to human anatomy, adequate image of the vessels and maintenance of their ultrasonography characteristics – compressible vein and pulsatile artery, so 9.31 (1.00)9.00 (1.41)that the performance of the procedure in the model was 9.54 (0.64)9.25 (0.88)similar to clinical practice. In the vein puncture itself, the model allowed other essential steps in obtaining a central venous access: guide wire passage, dilation of the tissue, catheter insertion, and even simulation of hypovolemic 8.86 (1.16)8.25 (1.03)states.9.15 (0.85)8.62 (0.74)model and considered it useful in teaching echo-guided When evaluated, all participants accepted the venipuncture for central venous access, receiving high average scores. That is to say, the procedure performed with Considering only those participants who had the model was very similar to reality. All participants also experience with the eco-guided procedure, the average considered the teaching methodology based on simulation score of the overall similarity was 8.62, and the similarity to be important before undergoing the procedure in scores of the vessels image, anatomical arrangement of patients. Therefore, this study confirms the importance of structures, sonographic characteristics, and puncture such a method in the development of medical skills in our were, respectively, 9.25, 9.00, 9.25, and 8.25 (Table 2).All participants approved the use of the model in learning eco-guided central access puncture and judged the training in the simulated experimental model as useful before performing the procedure in patients.DISCUSSIONstudents, rendering the learning process more reliable and enjoyable, as demonstrated in other works1,18,22 -27.When compared with other handmade simulators described in the literature, the model developed in this work proved to be more similar to reality15,18,23. It utilizes biological tissue with characteristics similar to the human tissues, mimics the relationship between artery and vein, as well as the ultrasonography characteristics, Classically, learning of procedures was based and also allowing the puncture, guide wire passage, and on the teaching model “see one, do one, teach one”. catheter insertion. Thus, the model simulates the real However, in recent years, there has been increasing need situation better when compared with others. Nachshon of prior training in simulators before acting in real clinical situations6,20. This boosts the confidence of practitioners et al. developed a model based on parts of chicken and balloons, and compared it to a synthetic mannequin. Both Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202530BertuolDevelopment and application of a swine model for training ultrasonography-guided central venous access 6had mean reality similarity scores below 7015. Other models described also used chicken parts, vascular prostheses14 or ballistic gelatin as a base18, but the similarity with reality was not evaluated. The models available in the Brazilian market for Despite the importance of central venous access training, since it is a procedure widely performed in medical practice and has complication rates that can reach up to 11% and be potentially fatal7, there are few described training models that are of low cost and have a training of central venous access can cost more than R$ high similarity to reality. Since the model presented in this 10,000.00 (around US$ 2,000.00), an unreal amount for work displays such characteristics, it becomes attractive in most public education centers. The only cost to develop the teaching the procedure, especially in centers where there model was the acquisition of the porcine parts. Nonetheless, is a shortage of resources for the acquisition of commercial the cost to assemble it, if all materials were to be bought, simulators.was estimated at R$ 50.00 (around US$ 10.00), allowing However, our study is not without limitations. usage for several times, only changing the Penrose drain The practice in simulators in generally performed in and the needles. In this study, we used the same porcine controlled environments, not generating the stress parts, since they were frozen, and the same Kehr drain present in real situations. The sample size was relatively during all training. The Penrose drain and needles were small and all participants were students or residents of replaced at each training session (approximately every ten the same institution. In addition, most study participants punctures) so that the average value per participant was were inexperienced with the use of ultrasonography and lower than R$ 2.00 (around US$ 0.40).had low experience in performing central venous access Among all the assessed items, the one with the in patients, requiring the evaluation of the model by lowest average score was the puncture similarity (8.86 professionals with experience and the comparison with and 8.25). We believe that this was due to the greater other models that simulate the same procedure.resistance of the porcine skin when compared with the human, a problem that can be minimized by using parts CONCLUSIONof younger animals and with less thick skin. Furthermore, during model development and testing prior to training, we We developed a simple, inexpensive and observed that the Penrose drain lost the ability to keep the reproducible simulation model, which showed high wall tension after about ten punctures, a fact that hampers resemblance to reality in the main features needed for a puncturing. Another fact observed was the progressive loss central venous access puncture guided by ultrasonography. of the needle bevel edge, decreasing the cutting capacity, It was approved by all study participants as a useful model a fact that also hinders the perforation of tissues, especially in learning the procedure. Thus, the developed model can the skin. For these reasons, we decided to substitute such be used as an adjunct in the training of physicians and materials every ten procedures, or earlier if necessary.medical graduates.R E S U M OIntrodução: o ensino baseado em simulação é poderosa ferramenta para o aprendizado na educação médica, permitindo a prática de procedimentos em ambientes controlados e por repetidas vezes. A realização de acesso venoso central é um dos procedimentos médicos mais realizados em ambiente hospitalar, tendo várias indicações e, quando realizada com o auxilio da ultrassonografia, os riscos das complicações do procedimento são minimizados. Objetivo: desenvolver, descrever e aplicar um modelo porcino para simulação de acesso venoso central guiado por ultrassonografia. Métodos: modelo porcino de baixo custo foi desenvolvido para treinamento de acesso venoso central guiado por ultrassonografia. Estudantes de medicina e médicos residentes receberam treinamento teórico em relação ao procedimento, seguido de treinamento prático no modelo. Posteriormente, os participantes avaliaram o modelo desenvolvido por meio de um questionário. Resultados: o estudo contou com 51 participantes. O escore médio de semelhança geral do modelo com a realidade foi 9,15. Quando separadas por características, as médias dos escores de semelhança da imagem dos vasos, da disposição anatômica das estruturas, das características ultrassonográficas e da punção foram, respectivamente, 9,27; 9,31; 9,54 e 8,86. Conclusão: o modelo foi aprovado e considerado útil para treinamento do procedimento por todos os participantes, além de ter baixo custo, ser simples, reprodutível e apresentar alta semelhança com a realidade, podendo ser utilizado como adjunto no treinamento de acesso venoso central guiado por ultrassonografia.Palavras chave: Ultrassonografia. Cateteres Venosos Centrais. Educação Médica. Simulação.Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202530BertuolDevelopment and application of a swine model for training ultrasonography-guided central venous access 7REFERENCES2012;116(3):539-73.12. Leung J, Duffy M, Finckh A. Real-time 1. Spencer-Netto FAC, Silva MTB, Constantino MM, Ultrasonographically-Guided Internal Jugular Vein Cipriani RFF, Cardoso M. Projeto de ensino: modelo Catheterization in the Emergency Department porcino de baixo custo para treinamento de Increases Success Rates and Reduces Complications: dissecção venosa. Rev Col Bras. 2017;44(5):545-8.a randomized, prospective study. Ann Emerg Med. 2. Beaubien J, Baker D. The use of simulation for 2006;48(5):540-7.training teamwork skills in health care: how low can 13. Lamperti M, Bodenham AR, Pittiruti M, Blaivas M, you go? Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13(1):i51-6.Augoustides JG, Elbarbary M, et al. International 3. Heitz C, Eyck RT, Smith M, Fitch M. Simulation in evidence-based recommendations on ultrasound-medical student education: survey of clerkship guided vascular Access. Intensive Care Med. directors in emergency medicine. West J Emerg 2012;38(7):1105–17.Med. 2011;12(4):455-60.14. Sznajder JI, Zveibil FR, Bitterman H, Weiner P, 4. Dourado A, Giannella T. Ensino baseado em Bursztein S. Central vein catheterization. Failure simulação na formação continuada de médicos: and complication rates by three percutaneous análise das percepções de alunos e professores de approaches. Arch Intern Med. 1986;146(2):259-61. um Hospital do Rio de Janeiro. Rev Bras Educ Med. 15. Nachshon A, Mitchell JD, Mueller A, Banner-2014;38(4):460-9.Goodspeed VM, McSparron JI. Expert evaluation of a 5. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. chicken tissue-based model for teaching ultrasound-Guidance on the use of ultrasound locating devices guided central venous catheter insertion. J Educ for placing central venous catheters [Internet]. Perioper Med. 2017;19(1):E503. London: NICE; 2002 [acessado 2020 Jan]. Disponível 16. Pérez-Quevedo O, López-Alvarez JM, Limiñana-em: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta49. Cañal JM, Loro-Ferrer JF. Design and application 6. Denadai R, Toledo AP, Bernades DM, Diniz FD, Eid of model for training ultrasound-guided vascular FB, Landranchi LMMM, et al. Simulation-based cannulation in pediatric patients. Med Intensiva. ultrasound-guided central venous cannulation 2016;40(6):364-70.training program. Acta Cir Bras. 2014;29(2):132-44.17. Jussila J. Preparing ballistic gelatine--review and 7. Grahan AS, Ozment C, Tegtmeyer K, Lai S, Braner proposal for a standard method. Forensic Sci Int. DAV. Central Venous Catheterization (Videos in 2004;141(2-3):91-8.Clinical Medicine). N Engl J Med. 2007;356(21):e21.18. Di Domenico S, Santori G, Porcile E, Licausi M, 8. Smith RN, Nolan JP. Central venous catheters. BMJ. Centanaro M, Valente U. Inexpensive homemade 2013;347:f6570.models for ultrasound-guided vein cannulation 9. Abboud PAC, Kendall JL. Ultrasound guidance training. J Clin Anesth. 2007;19(7):491-6.for vascular access. Emerg Med Clin N Am. 19. Ortega R, Song M, Hansen CJ, Barash P. Videos in 2004;22(3):749–73.clinical medicine. Ultrasound-Guided Internal Jugular 10. McGee DC, Gould MK. Preventing complications Vein Cannulation. N Engl J Med. 2010; 362(16):e57.of central venous catheterization. N Engl J Med. 20. Ma IW, Teteris E, Roberts JM, Bacchus M. Who 2003;348(12):1123-33. is teaching and supervising our junior residents’ 11. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on central venous catheterizations? BMC Med Educ. Central Venous Access; Rupp SM, Apfelbaum JL, Blitt 2011;11:16.C, Caplan RA, Connis RT, Domino KB, Fleisher LA, 21. Farjad Sultan S, Shorten G, Iohom G. Simulators Grant S, Mark JB, Morray JP, Nickinovich DG, Tung A. for training in ultrasound guided procedures. Med Practice guidelines for central venous access: a report Ultrason. 2013;15(2):125-31.by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task 22. Robertson B, Kaplan B, Atallah H, Higgins M, Lewitt Force on Central Venous Access. Anesthesiology. MJ, Ander D. The use of simulation and a modified Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202530BertuolDevelopment and application of a swine model for training ultrasonography-guided central venous access 8Team STEPPS curriculum for medical and nursing MM, Cardoso M, Cipriani RFF, Pereira RA. Projeto student team training. Simul Healthc. 2010;5(6):332-de ensino: modelo suíno para treinamento de 7.drenagem torácica. Rev Col Bras Cir. 2016;43(1):60-23. Miranda RB, Nardino EP, Gomes T, Farias P. New 3.technique for ultrasound-guided vascular access 26. Spencer-Netto FAC, Zacharias P, Cipriani RFF, training using an animal tissue model. J Vasc Bras. Constantino MM, Cardoso M, Pereira RA. Modelo 2012;11(1):83-7. porcino no ensino da cricotiroidotomia cirúrgica. 24.  Takayesu JK, Farrell SE, Evans AJ, Sullivan JE, Rev Col Bras Cir. 2015:42(3):193-6Pawlowski JB, Gordon JA. How do clinical clerkship 27.  Wang EE, Beaumont J, Kharasch M, Vozenilek J. students experience simulator-based teaching? A Resident response to integration of simulation-based qualitative analysis. Simul Healthc. 2006;1(4):215-9.education into emergency medicine conference. 25. Spencer-Netto FAC, Sommers CG, Constantino Acad Emerg Med. 2008;15(11):1207-10.Received in: 15/03/2020Mailing address:Accepted for publication: 09/04/2020Jackson Vinícius de Lima BertuolConflict of interest: no.Funding source: none.E-mail: jvlbertuol@hotmail.com/jvlbertuol@hotmail.comRev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202530BertuolDevelopment and application of a swine model for training ultrasonography-guided central venous access