Films as an Educational Resource in the Teaching of Humanistic Attitudes to Medicine StudentsO Cinema como Recurso Educacional no Ensino de Atitudes Humanísticas a Estudantes de MedicinaPALAVRAS-CHAVE – Educação Médica. – Cinema como Assunto. – Humanização da Assistência.Thaíla Soares da Costa PicançoI Maira Tiyomi Sacata Tongu NazimaI Braulio Erison França dos SantosI Olavo Magalhães Picanço JúniorI Maria Izabel de Albuquerque CambraiaI Leila do Socorro da Silva MoraisI Luis Felipe da Silva PenaI Karina Suzany Nery CostaIRESUMOIntrodução: A educação médica contemporânea prioriza o desenvolvimento de conhecimento científico e habilidades técnicas, associados a atitudes profissionais. Atitudes são componentes da habilidade afeti-va e influenciam a prática médica, por isso devem ser ensinadas sistematicamente durante a graduação. A utilização de filmes como recurso pedagógico na graduação médica possibilita uma reflexão no contex-to biopsicossocial em que o paciente está inserido, contribuindo para desenvolver atitudes humanísticas entre estudantes de Medicina e futuros médicos. Objetivo: Avaliar a eficácia do cinema como recurso educacional no ensino de atitudes humanísticas aos discentes do curso de Medicina. Material e Méto-dos: Foi realizado um estudo transversal, exploratório, quantitativo, com 107 estudantes do primeiro ao sexto ano do curso de Medicina da Universidade Federal do Amapá. Foi utilizada a Escala de Atitude de Estudantes de Medicina (validada por Colares et al.1) antes e depois da exibição de filmes relacionados a temáticas relevantes na área médica. Esta escala psicométrica é composta de respostas de múltipla es-colha do tipo Likert e visa aferir atitudes de estudantes de Medicina em relação aos seguintes fatores: as-sistência primária à saúde; aspectos psicológicos e emocionais envolvidos nas doenças; aspectos éticos no exercício profissional; doença mental, situações relacionadas à morte; pesquisa científica. Foi empregado o Teste de Wilcoxon (Wilcoxon Rank Test) para comparar dados de amostras pareadas. Resultados: Todos os fatores avaliados pela escala de atitudes dos estudantes de Medicina frente a aspectos relevantes da prática médica apresentaram aumento significativo na frequência de atitudes positivas (p < 0,05) após as sessões de cinema entre os alunos do primeiro ao quarto ano da graduação. Os alunos do quinto e sexto ano não apresentaram mudança significativa de atitudes nos fatores relacionados à morte, à doença mental e à contribuição com o avanço científico da medicina. Conclusão: O cinema é uma ferramenta pedagógica eficaz no ensino de atitudes humanísticas a estudantes do curso médico.REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 43 (1 Supl. 1) : 57-68; 2019I Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço et al.  https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v43suplemento1-20180164.INGKEY-WORDS – Medical Education. – Films as Topic. – Humanization of Assistance. ABSTRACTIntroduction: Contemporary medical education prioritizes the development of scientific knowledge and technical skills, associated with professional attitudes. Attitudes are components of affective ability and influence medical practice, so they should be taught systematically during undergraduate training. The use of films as a pedagogical resource in medical training allows reflection on the biopsychosocial context in which the patient is inserted, contributing to the development of humanistic attitudes among students and future physicians. Objective: To evaluate the effectiveness of cinema as an educational resource in teaching humanistic attitudes to medical students. Material and Methods: A cross-sectional, quasi-experimental, qualitative and quantitative study was carried out with 107 students from the first to sixth year of the medical course of the Federal University of Amapá. The Medical Students Attitude Scale (validated by the author Maria de Fátima Colares, 2002) was used before and after the exhibition of films related to relevant themes in the medical area. This psychometric scale is composed of multiple-choice Likert-type responses and aims to assess the attitudes of medical students regarding the following factors: primary health care; psychological and emotional aspects involved in diseases; ethical aspects in professional practice; mental illness, death-related situations; scientific research. The Wilcoxon Rank Test was used to compare data from paired samples. Results: All the factors evaluated by the medical students attitudes scale related to relevant aspects of medical practice showed a significant increase in the frequency of positive attitudes (p < 0.05) among the first- to fourth-year students following the cinema sessions. The fifth- and sixth-year students did not present significant changes in attitudes related to death, mental illness and contribution to the scientific advancement of medicine. Conclusion: Cinema is an effective pedagogical tool in teaching humanistic attitudes in the preclinical series of the medical course. Recebido em 4/4/19Aceito em 3/6/19INTRODUCTIONThe context of medical education has undergone several changes in recent decades, based on findings that there was a lack of traditional medical courses training students with the characteristics expected of a future professional, such as communication skills, competence in performing practical tasks, aptitude for personal development and professional-ism2. Consequently, medicine schools have developed curric-ular reforms with the intention of implementing active teach-ing methodologies and providing students with the learning of these skills. Among the skills required for the training of future physicians, affective skills represent a challenge in the educational process, since there is no consensus about a train-ing model for students regarding attitudes and behaviours related to medical practice3. Attitudes are components of af-fective skills and indicate an individual’s willingness to act in favour of or against a stimulus, one can assess feelings and behaviours by virtue of such attitudes4.The teaching of humanistic attitudes is considered es-sential in medical training, as an underlying competence re-quired among health professionals5. Several strategies have been proposed to promote the teaching of humanistic atti-tudes during undergraduate medical training, including the incentive toward knowledge in the area of human sciences, so that students can recognise the sociocultural aspects of each individual and, thus, practice patient-centred medicine, as well as the development of evaluative methods with effective instruments capable of measuring the actual learning of the interpersonal skills foreseen in curricular grids6,7.One way of approaching humanism in medicine during undergraduate training can be achieved by the adaptation of cinematographic films to the educational context8. The use of film as a pedagogical resource in medical teaching has proven to be an efficient tool, since, through the dramatization of situ-ations related to the disease process, students can learn to un-derstand and reflect on the biopsychosocial context in which the patient finds himself. Therefore, the experience with film for a medical student would represent an emotional memory that would heavily influence the development of attitudes re-lated to the theme addressed through this teaching method9.The assessment processes of Medicine courses are still very much geared toward cognitive evaluation, and, although REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 5843 (1 Supl. 1) : 57 – 68 ; 2019Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço et al.  https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v43suplemento1-20180164.INGseveral models for assessing technical skills have been devel-oped recently, the assessment process of affective skills re-mains deficient. Therefore, the evaluation of medical students’ attitudes takes on academic relevance, since any proof of the efficiency of the pedagogical tools adopted would enable the proposal of a program of interventions required to promote the systematic development of affective skills throughout the whole course.MATERIALS AND METHODSType of studyAn exploratory, cross-sectional, quantitative study was con-ducted.Study populationThe participants of the study were first- to sixth-year students from the Medicine course of the Federal University of Amapá in 2016, who were willing to participate in the proposed in-tervention and answer the questionnaires. The study sample consisted of a total of 107 students; 27 from the first year, 23 from the third, 17 from the fourth, 21 from the fifth and 19 from the sixth year of the course.sitizing students to the recognition of the patient’s emotional manifestations when faced with his or her loss of health; char-acterization of the phases of bereavement: denial, anger, ne-gotiation, depression, acceptance10; recognition of humanized medical attitudes.One week after the first cinema session, the second film, Still Alice was screened. This movie tells the story of a university professor with early-onset Alzheimer’s Disease, portraying the changes in her professional and personal life with the progressive restrictions imposed on her by the neu-rological degenerative disease. The discussion that followed the presentation of this film broached the correlation of the clinical reasoning between the physical disease and the de-velopment of psychological reactions; the transformations of the family arrangements of mental health patients and the loss of autonomy suffered by those patients. After this discussion, the IAA was readministered with the aim of as-sessing whether there had been any significant change in the attitudes of the students who participated in the study after the intervention.The films were screened at cinema theatres in the city of Macapá.Inclusion and exclusion criteriaEthical proceduresThe survey included students who were duly enrolled on the course and who accepted to take part in the study.Students who had only watched one of the films or who did not partake in the discussions were excluded from the re-search.Research stages and methodsOn the first day of the study, two instruments were adminis-tered for data collection: a sociodemographic questionnaire, developed by the author, and the “Instrument for Assessing Medicine Students’ Attitudes in view of Relevant Aspects of Medical Practice” (IAA), validated by Maria de Fátima Colares based on a 2002 study1. Subsequently, the students watched the entire movie The Doctor, which tells the story of a successful doctor, whose behaviour changes after he is diag-nosed with cancer. The protagonist finds himself interacting with medicine, the hospitals and other doctors from a new point of view, that of the patient.Straight after the film session, there was a brief discussion that used some scenes from the film as examples to contextu-alize the student in the following aspects: the difference be-tween the biomedical model and the biopsychosocial model of medical work; perception and management of the emotional dimensions involved in the doctor-patient relationship; sen-The project abides by the ethical principles for research in-volving humans, as exposed in CONEP Resolution 466/2012, and was submitted to the UNIFAP Research Ethics Commit-tee, and approved under report number 1.693.248.Research instrumentsTwo instruments were used for data collection. The first was a sociodemographic questionnaire, developed to build the pro-file of the UNIFAP Medicine student.The second instrument used was the IAA, the scale in-tended to measure the medical students’ attitudes in relation to the following factors:•	 Factor 1: psychological and emotional aspects in or-ganic and mental diseases. Composed of 11 questions, the objective is to verify the importance given by stu-dents to the patient’s emotional state over the course of the disease;•	 Factor 2: coping with situations related to death. Con-sisting of eight questions, the objective is to assess the difficulty encountered by students in situations relat-ed to death or dying;•	 Factor 3: primary health care. Encompasses 11 state-ments about the importance of the general practitioner and the practice of preventive measures;REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 5943 (1 Supl. 1) : 57 – 68 ; 2019Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço et al.  https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v43suplemento1-20180164.ING•	 Factor 4: aspects related to mental health. Proposes eight statements to evaluate the students’ feelings in relation to mental health;•	 Factor 5: contribution with the scientific advance of medicine. Corresponds to six statements and aims to understand what the student thinks about the impor-tance of research in the medical career;•	 Factor 6: other aspects of the physician’s role. Eight questions to analyse the students’ attitudes in view of various aspects relative to the physician’s role in pri-mary and tertiary health care services.For each item, there are five possible responses: 1 - entire-ly agree; 2 - partly agree; 3 - I’m in doubt; 4 - partly disagree; 5 - entirely disagree.Data analysisThe students’ sociodemographic data were analysed descrip-tively.The data obtained through the Instrument for Assessing Medicine Students’ Attitudes in view of Relevant Aspects of Medical Practice (IAA) were gathered into three groups of answers: one group containing the answer options 1 and 2, which indicate positive attitudes according to the behaviour adopted in relation to the question about a given factor; anoth-er representing options 4 and 5, indicating negative attitudes, and a final category for option 3, which signals the student’s indecision regardless of the question.On this scale, the scores of the factors are not negatively scaled, so the higher the score the worse the attitude. There-fore, to analyse the data in such a way as to obtain an average score for each factor, the statements were reversed in negative phrases. Consequently, all the questions stated in the negative (questions 2, 5, 9, 10, 14, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 28, 29, 31, 35, 38, 40, 41, 43, 47, 49, 50, 51 and 52) were inversely recalculated: (1 = 5); (2 = 4); (4 = 2); (5 = 1).A nonparametric hypothesis test was applied to analyse the difference between the students’ positive answers before and after the film screenings. The Wilcoxon Rank Test was therefore employed to compare paired sample data. The fol-lowing was considered: H0: median = 0 (no difference in me-dians between the moments with and without intervention); H1: median ≠ 0 (difference in medians between moments with and without intervention). The level of significance used in the whole analysis was α = 0.05.The study data were analysed with the aid of the program Statistical Package for Social Science, version 22.0 (SPSS).Assessment of the internal reliability of the scaleAnalysis of the internal consistency of the IAA was performed using Cronbach’s Alpha, which gave a result of 0.94 prior to the intervention and 0.80 after the intervention, which were considered excellent and acceptable values, respectively.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONSociodemographic dataOne hundred and seven students participated in the study, 52 (48.6%) of whom were male, and 55 (51.4%) female. Age var-ied from 18 to 38 years, with a mean of 23.35 years.The survey had a participation rate of 39.64% of the first- to fourth-year Medicine students in 2016. It is highlighted that the second year was excluded, as the participation rate of these students was below 10%. It is likely that there was little interest on the part of these students in participating in an ac-tivity relative to the theme of Humanization. Among the med-ical intern students, in the fifth and sixth years of the course, 76.92% participated in the study.In relation to the profile of the study sample, it was found that most the students were born in the state of Amapá (54.2%), have a household income of more than eight minimum wag-es (38.3%) and live with their families (62.6%). Catholicism was indicated as the most prevalent religion (55.1%). When questioned about which specialization they intended to fol-low once they had completed the medical course, 43.9% chose specialties related to medical practice.Students’ attitudes after the interventionWhen the students’ attitudes after the intervention were examined, the effectiveness of this method of teaching was ev-ident, since all the factors assessed by the IAA scale presented significant increase in the frequency of positive attitudes (p < 0.05) (Graph 1).These data corroborate the study conducted by McNeilly and Wengel11, who also demonstrated a significant increase in theoretical knowledge and positive attitudes in relation to the learning of psychotherapeutic methods among third-year medical students, using video clips from a television series that portrays the care routine in an accident and emergency unit as a pedagogical tool. The effectiveness of cinema in con-tributing to the teaching of humanistic attitudes in medical training can be explained by a conceptual model described in the literature by Shapiro and Rucker12, named the “Dom Quix-ote Effect”. According to the authors, the effect provoked in the students by the films can be compared to the influence that the main character from the classic novel Dom Quixote exerts on the behaviour of his companion Sancho Panza. Being in the REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 6043 (1 Supl. 1) : 57 – 68 ; 2019Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço et al.  https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v43suplemento1-20180164.INGGr a ph 1 Graphic representation of the frequencies of positive and negative attitudes among UNIFAP Medicine students before and after the cinema sessions in research conducted in the city of Macapá in 2016.*p < 0.001 Source: Research record sheets.Notes: Factor 1: psychological and emotional aspects in organic and mental diseases; Factor 2: aspects related to death; Factor 3: primary health care; Factor 4: aspects related to mental health; Factor 5: contribution with the scientific advance of medicine; Factor 6: other aspects of the phsyician’s role.company of the idealist Dom Quixote acted as a trigger for a change in the values and attitudes of the pragmatic Sancho Panza. Likewise, when watching the film screenings, the stu-dents would be induced toward a temporary idealism.Watching films that portray nuances of medical practice can contribute more to medical students and residents devel-oping empathy and altruism than routine clinical contact with patients. This occurs because in real clinical situations the stu-dents feel overloaded by the pressure to avoid technical errors in their patient management and try not to get emotionally involved with them, for fear of that diverting them from the result that they deem essential in medical practice: to cure the disease. When watching a film, students are free from the im-minent responsibility imposed on them in medical practice and can be more susceptible to emotional catharsis upon wit-nessing the patient’s suffering when dealing with the disease, even if the situation and the characters depicted are fictional12.The movies used in the intervention of this study have been used in several medical courses in numerous countries. The film The Doctor has been widely used as a pedagogical tool in the teaching of standards of behaviour to Medicine stu-dents, highlighting the inherent aspects of the patient-doctor relationship 13, communication skills14, death and bereave-ment15. When watching the film, the students can be moved to-ward showing altruistic attitudes due to having gone through a psychological phenomenon called “elevation”, described by Haidt16 to designate the positive emotional experience gained by someone when witnessing another individual perform-ing a virtuous act. Schnall et al.17 report that exposure, even if brief, to pro-social behaviour toward other individuals stimu-lates elevation, which, in turn motivates altruism. During the film, the main character demonstrates solidarity with a friend who is also undergoing treatment of advanced stage cancer, displaying benevolence toward her emotional suffering. The psychological phenomenon of elevation might have been re-sponsible for the result found in this study. The students in general and, in particular, from the pre-clinical phase of the course displayed a significant change in humanistic attitudes in all the factors assessed on the IAA scale after watching the film, having internalized the virtuous act of the doctor repre-sented in the film.The other film used in the intervention, Still Alice, has been used as an instrument for reflection on perceptions held of Alz-heimer disease patients, of the loss of autonomy suffered by those patients and the effects caused on the family dynamic re-sulting from the required care for a patient with a progressive-ly invalidating neurological pathology18,19. It is possible that the students from the pre-clinical years, who displayed signifi-cant shift in attitudes towards mental health after the interven-tion, despite not yet having had any contact with psychiatric patients, were able to feel empathy for the character’s life story when she starts to lose her social status, her career and her role in the family as a consequence of her mental illness.When analysing the intern students’ attitudes toward factor 4 (aspects related to mental health) after the interven-tion (Graph 3), no significant different was found (p > 0.05) when compared to the initial values. The students’ emotional involvement with the film, which portrays a patient afflicted by a mental illness, may have failed to make enough impact to affect their attitudes in relation to the stigma associated to such patients. The difference in the behaviour of the pre-clin-ical students (Graph 2), who responded positively to the film, and the intern students suggests that contact with the psychi-atric ward of a hospital environment might help shape student attitudes.It should be highlighted that, at the time of the interven-tion, the fifth- and sixth-year students were doing rotation pre-cisely on the Psychiatry module. Studies have demonstrated a the culture of stigmatization of psychiatric patients among health professionals in the hospital environment and that such a stigma is a factor that negatively influences students’ atti-REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 6143 (1 Supl. 1) : 57 – 68 ; 2019 Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço et al.  https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v43suplemento1-20180164.INGGr a ph 2 Graphic representation of the frequency of positive and negative attitudes of the group of students from the first, third and fourth years of the undergraduate medicine course at UNIFAP in a study conducted in Macapá in 2016.Source: Research record sheets.Notes: Factor 1: psychological and emotional aspects in organic and mental diseases; Factor 2: aspects related to death; Factor 3: primary health care; Factor 4: aspects related to mental health; Factor 5: contribution with the scientific advance of medicine; Factor 6: other aspects of the physician’s role.tudes towards Psychiatry20,21. Totic et al.22, evaluating the atti-tudes and behaviours of medical students before and after the rotation in the psychiatric ward, observed that the sixth-year students, who had already completed their internship in that area, showed a greater tendency to stigmatize patients with mental illness. Kerby et al.23 found comparable results to those found in this study when investigating fourth-year medical students’ attitudes toward mental health and psychiatry after a cinema session screening films with anti-stigma content. The authors demonstrated a significant increase in empathetic at-titudes toward mental health following the intervention with films, however this effect petered out after completing intern-ship in the Psychiatric area. The same phenomenon observed in this study could possibly be attributed to the fact that the students in the pre-clinical years, without the influence of hav-ing contact with psychopathological patients in the hospital environment, experienced the expected effect of the film: in-creased empathy in relation to those patients. However, the students who were already working as interns in the hospi-tal’s psychiatry ward were unable to change their stigmatizing view that they had witnessed in the company of health pro-fessionals in this area, even after intervention with the films.The intern students also showed no significant change in attitudes after the intervention in relation to factor 2, which corresponds to questions related to death (Graph 3). This factor was related to a high percentage of positive attitudes among these students before the cinema sessions (60.9%). The percentage of positive responses to this factor was higher than the results found in other studies. Alves et al.24 applied the IAA scale to medical student interns and found a higher per-centage of negative attitudes in the questions related to death (49.3%). Mascia et al.25 found a higher percentage of conflict-ing attitudes (55%) related to this same factor when assessing sixth-year medical students. These results demonstrate that, in this aspect, the UNIFAP intern students reported superior performance to students from the institutions where the other surveys were conducted. It is possible that the films exerted little impact on changing attitudes because the students al-ready presented a high tendency to act positively in situations that involve death, leaving a small margin for increasing that tendency through the intervention executed. The positive at-titudes of the final year students in relation to factor 2 were superior than those presented among students in the initial years of the course (Graph 2). One possible explanation for this finding would be the closer contact enjoyed by interns with patients during their hospital internships, as the litera-ture has already demonstrated that students who had the op-portunity to witness the death of patients were more suscep-tible to presenting positive attitudes toward the physician’s responsibility for caring for end-of-life patients and offering support in the family’s bereavement26.Factor 5, corresponding to the contribution with the scientif-ic advance of medicine, also demonstrated no significant change in the percentage of positive attitudes following the interven-tion among the student interns (Graph 3). The could be due to the group of students already presenting a high percentage of positive attitudes in this factor even before the intervention, as throughout the course they were encouraged to frequently read scientific texts and prepare for discussing topics in tutorials and in the other practical activities carried out in the first four years of the course, as well as in the discussions about clinical cases and articles that are used in the interns’ theoretical studies. This fact would justify the difference in the behaviour of this group of students in relation to the pre-clinical students, who displayed increased positive attitudes after the intervention.One surprising finding in the analysis of the general group of all the students from first to sixth year (Graph 1) is that they displayed changes in attitude toward factor 3 (primary health care) and factor 6 (other aspects of the physician’s role) after the intervention, added to the fact that the first- to fourth-year REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 6243 (1 Supl. 1) : 57 – 68 ; 2019 Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço et al.  https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v43suplemento1-20180164.INGGr a ph 3 Graphic representation of the frequency of positive and negative attitudes of the group of students from the fifth and sixth years of the undergraduate medicine course at UNIFAP in a study conducted in Macapá in 2016.Source: Research record sheets.Notes: Factor 1: psychological and emotional aspects in organic and mental diseases; Factor 2: aspects related to death; Factor 3: primary health care; Factor 4: aspects related to mental health; Factor 5: contribution with the scientific advance of medicine; Factor6: other aspects of the physician’s role.students (Graph 2) also showed a significant increase in posi-tive attitudes toward factor 5 (contribution with the scientific advance of medicine). This occurred despite these issues not being directly addressed in the films.One explanation for this result might be that the interven-tion exerted a psychological effect on those students that was not restricted to the themes addressed in the films and dis-cussions. It could be inferred from this that the formation of positive attitudes towards factors addressed in the films may have been generalised to encompass other stimuli that are not within one restricted area of comparison, as Doob asserts27.In view of the findings of this research, we can infer that cinema is an effective pedagogical methodology in the teach-ing medical students affective skills, however it cannot be affirmed that the effect provoked in the students perpetuates throughout undergraduate training or even during future pro-fessional practice. From this perspective, Coulehan28 claims that repeated doses of the Dom Quixote effect can contribute to character development and suggests that, to maintain the temporary upsurge in altruistic feeling triggered by the cine-ma sessions, the students need to identify other routine practi-cal situations in medicine that simulate that effect, attributing the teachers and preceptors with the responsibility of repre-senting a professional model to be followed by their appren-tices. However, what frequently happens during undergradu-ate medical training is that the students undergo a conflict of values, as the explicit medical curriculum in effect includes the teaching of empathy, professionalism and moral development as an objective, however those same students are exposed, es-pecially during their medical intern years, to the hidden cur-riculum. And that has a greater impact on determining inad-equate stances, such as disrespect in the relationship with the patient, abuse of power in the hierarchy established between teacher and student, as well as misalignment between the ide-alization medical practice, generally conveyed as a model of professionalism by the formal curriculum, and the actual clin-ical experiences of the students in the hospitals29,30.Therefore, cinema should be used in medical education as a tool for teaching humanistic attitudes. However, to optimize its effect during internship and prolong it in the initial years of the course, the teachers need to appreciate the importance of ensuring a uniform standard behaviour that demonstrates competence and virtue, in keeping with the moral values that medical training aims to instil in future physicians.STUDY LIMITATIONSDespite the satisfactory results obtained, one can identify as a limitation of this study the failure to perform a sequential attitude assessment of these students throughout the entire undergraduate course in order to evaluate their commitment to maintaining a humanized posture in relation to patients, including after concluding the course and during their profes-sional practice. Therefore, it cannot be inferred that this peda-gogical strategy really has a significant impact on changing the profile of medics who undergo this experience in their train-ing, bearing in mind the cross-sectional design of the study.CONCLUSIONCinema is an effective pedagogical tool in the teaching of hu-manistic attitudes during undergraduate medical training and should be systematically inserted into the pre-clinical years of Medicine courses as a complementary educational resource to REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 6343 (1 Supl. 1) : 57 – 68 ; 2019 Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço et al.  https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v43suplemento1-20180164.INGteach students affective skills. During internship this educa-tional resource could be used, but it is necessary to associate the method to a change in behaviour among health profession-als in the hospital environment, for working alongside those with standards of behaviour that demonstrate stigma and lack of empathy toward patients overwhelms the beneficial psy-chological effects triggered by the films in medical students.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS12. Shapiro J, Rucker L. The Don Quixote effect: why going to the movies can help develop empathy and altruism in me-dical students and residents. Families, System & Health. 2004; 22(4):445-52.13. Baños J. How literature and popular movies can help in medical education: applications for teaching the doctor--patient relationship. 2007. Med Educ;41: 915-20.14. Alexander M. The doctor: a seminal video for cinemeduca-tion. Fam Med. 2002; 34(2):92-4.We would like to express our sincere thanks to the author Ma-ria de Fátima Avieiro Colares, for kindly making the instru-ment used in this research available.15. Byrne P. Why psychiatrists should watch films (or what has cinema ever done for psychiatry?). Advances in Psychiatric Treatment. 2009; 15:286-96.REFERÊNCIAS1. Colares MF, Troncon LE, Figueiredo JF, Cianflone AR, Ro-drigues ML, Piccinato CE, et al. Construção de um instru-mento para avaliação das atitudes de estudantes de me-dicina frente a aspectos relevantes da prática médica. Rev Bras Educ Med. 2002; 26 (3): 194-203.2. Rennie SC, Rudland JR. Differences in medical students`attitudes to academic misconduct and reported behavior across the years- a questionnaire study. J Med Ethics. 2003 Apr; 29 (2): 97-102.3. Woloschuk W, Harasym PH, Remple W. Attitude change during medical school: a cohort study. Med Educ. 2004; 38:522-34.4. Smith RC, Dorsey AM, Lyles JS, Frankel RM. Teaching self--awareness enhances learning about patiente-centered in-terviewing. Acad Med. 1999; 74(11): 1242-8.5. Cohen LG, Sherif YA. Twelve tips on teaching and learning humanism in medical education. Med Teach. 2014; 36: 680-4.6. Liao L. Opening our eyes to a critical approach to medi-cine: the humanities in medical education. Med Teach. 2017;39 (2): 220-1.7. Schwartzstein RM. Getting the right medical students - na-ture versus nurture. NEJM. 2015; 372 (17): 1586-7.8. Alexander M, Hall M, Pettice Y. Cinemeducation: a com-prehensive guide to using film in medical education. Fam Med. 1994; 26:430-3.9. Blasco PG, Gallian DM, Roncoletta AF, Moreto G. Cinema para o estudante de medicina: um recurso afetivo/efetivo na educação humanística. Rev Bras Edu Med. 2005; 29 (2): 119-28.10. Kübler-Ross E. Sobre a morte e o morrer. 9th ed. São Paulo: WMF Martins Fontes; 2008.11. McNeilly DP, Wengel SP. Teaching psychotherapeutic techniques to medical students. Acad Psychiatr. 2001; 25(4):193-200.16. Keyes CL, Haidt J. Flourishing: positive psychology and the life well-lived. Haidt J. Washington DC: American Psychology Association; 2003. Elevation and the positive psychology of morality; p. 275-289.17. Schnall S, Roper J, Fessler DM. Elevation leads to altruistic behavior. Psychological Science. 2010; 21(3): 315-20.18. Güércio NH. A arte de perder: os silenciamentos do mal de Alzheimer na maturidade feminina protagonista em para sempre alice. Revista de Comunicação da Universidade Católica de Brasília. 2016; 9(2):221-35.19. Mullard A. The art of losing. The Lancet. 2015; 385 (9970):764.20. Aydin N, Yigit A, Inandi T, Kirpinar I. Attitudes of hospi-tal staff toward mentally ill patients in a teaching hospital. International Journal of Social Psychiatry. 2003; 49:17-26.21. Dixon RP, Roberts LM, Lawrie S, Jones LA, Humphreys MS. Medical students’ atitudes to psychiatric illness in pri-mary care. Med Educ. 2008; 42(11): 1080-7.22. Totic S, Stojiljkovic D, Pavlovic Z, Zaric N, Zarcovic B, Ma-lic L, et al. Stigmatization of ‘psychiatric label’ by medical and non-medical students. International Journal of Social Psychiatry. 2011; 58 (5): 455-62.23. Kerby J, Calton T, Dimambro B, Flood C, Glazebrook C. Anti-stigma films and medical students’ attitudes towards mental illness and psychiatry: randomized controlled trial. Psychiatric Bulletin. 2008; 32:345-9.24. Alves TL, Alves FV, Melo EV, Oliva-Costa EF. Evaluation of medical interns’ attitudes towards relevant aspects of medical practice. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2017; 63(6):492-9.25. Mascia AR, Silva FB, Lucchese AC, De Marco MA, Mar-tins MC, Martins LA. Atitudes frente a aspectos relevantes da prática médica: estudo transversal randomizado com alunos de segundo e sexto anos. Rev Bras Edu Med. 2009; 33(1): 40-8.26. Wendy GA, Williams BS, Bost JE, Bernard D. Exposure to death is associated with positive attitudes and higher kno-REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 6443 (1 Supl. 1) : 57 – 68 ; 2019Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço et al.  https://doi.org/10.1590/1981-5271v43suplemento1-20180164.INGwledge about end-of-life care in graduating medical stu-dents. J Palliat Med. 2008; 11(9):1227-33.27. Doob LW. The behaviour of attitudes. Psychological Review. 1947; 54:135-156 apud Torres C., Neiva ER. Psicologia social: principais temas e vertentes. Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2011.28. Coulehan J. The possible dream: a commentary on the Don Quixote effect. Families, System & Health. 2004; 22(4): 453-6.29. Coulehan J, Williams PC, Van McCrary S, Belling C. The best lack all conviction: biomedical ethics, professionalism, and social responsibility. Cambridge Quarterly of Health-care Ethics. 2003; 12: 21-38.30. Gaufberg EH, Batalden M, Sands R, Bell SK. The hidden curriculum: what can we learn from third-year medical stu-dent narrative reflection? Acad Med. 2010; 85 (11):1709-16.CONTRIBUTION OF THE AUTHORS1. Msc. Thaíla Soares da Costa Picanço:•	 Autora principal, responsável pela idealização do pro-jeto, revisão da literatura, aquisição dos dados e reda-ção do manuscrito.•	 Médica geriatra, preceptora do internato de Clínica Médica do curso de Medicina da Universidade Federal do Amapá (UNIFAP).•	 Mestre em Ciências da Saúde pela Universidade Fede-4. Msc. Olavo Magalhães Picanço Júnior•	 Responsável pela aquisição dos dados do projeto.•	 Mestre em Ciências pela Universidade Federal de São Paulo.•	 Médico Oncologista, preceptor do internato de Clínica Cirúrgica do curso de Medicina da Universidade Fede-ral do Amapá.5. Msc. Leila do Socorro da Silva Morais•	 Responsável pela aquisição dos dados do projeto.•	 Médica Pneumologista, docente do curso de Medicina da Universidade Federal do Amapá.•	 Mestre em Ciências da Saúde pela Universidade Fede-ral do Amapá.6. Msc. Maria Izabel de Albuquerque Cambraia•	 Responsável pelo auxílio na interpretação dos dados do projeto em relação aos aspectos que envolvem a área da Psicologia.•	 Psicóloga do Centro de Atenção Psicossocial Álcool e outras Drogas (CAPS-AD).•	 Mestre em Ciências da Saúde pela Universidade Federal do Amapá.ral do Amapá.7. Karina Suzany Nery Costa•	 Local de trabalho: Hospital de Clínicas Alberto Lima •	 Responsável pelo auxílio na organização e tabulação (Macapá/AP).dos dados do projeto.•	 Email: thailapicanco@bol.com.br•	 Médica graduada pela Universidade Federal do Ama-2. Dra. Maira Tiyomi Sacata Tongu Nazimapá.•	 Orientadora do projeto de pesquisa, responsável pela 8. Luis Felipe da Silva Penarevisão crítica do conteúdo intelectual.•	 Responsável pelo auxílio na organização e tabulação •	 Doutorado em Medicina pela Universidade Federal de dos dados do projeto.São Paulo.•	 Médico graduado pela Universidade Federal do Amapá.•	 Médica oftalmologista, docente do curso de Medicina da Universidade Federal do Amapá (UNIFAP).CONFLICT OF INTEREST•	 Docente/orientadora do Programa de Mestrado em Declaro não haver conflito de interesse dos autores.Ciências da Saúde da UNIFAP.3. Msc. Bráulio Érison França dos Santos•	 Responsável pela aquisição dos dados do projeto.•	 Mestre em Ciências da Saúde pela Universidade Fede-ral do Amapá.•	 Médico perito, docente do curso de Medicina da Uni-versidade Federal do Amapá (UNIFAP).CORRESPONDENCE ADDRESSthailapicanco@bol.com.brRodovia Juscelino Kubitscheck, no. 4.440.CEP: 68903-419Macapá- AP This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits  unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE EDUCAÇÃO MÉDICA 6543 (1 Supl. 1) : 57 – 68 ; 2019