J Pediatr (Rio J). 2019;95(5):545---551www.jped.com.brORIGINAL ARTICLEPsychological  preparation  reduces  preoperativeanxiety in children.  Randomized  and  double-blindtrial(cid:2),(cid:2)(cid:2)Dânia P. MelettiLeopoldo  M. Silva d, Norma S.P. Módolo ea,∗, José Fernando A. Meletti b, Rodrigo P.S. Camargo c,a Faculdade  de  Medicina  de  Jundiaí,  Departamento  de  Ciências  da  Saúde,  São  Paulo,  SP,  Brazilb Faculdade  de  Medicina  de  Jundiaí,  Departamento  de  Anestesiologia,  São  Paulo,  SP,  Brazilc Faculdade  de  Medicina  de  Jundiaí,  Departamento  de  Ginecologia  e  Obstetrícia,  São  Paulo,  SP,  Brazild Universidade  Estadual  Paulista  (Unesp),  Departamento  de  Anestesiologia,  São  Paulo,  SP,  Brazile Universidade  Estadual  Paulista  (Unesp),  Faculdade  de  Medicina  de  Botucatu,  Departamento  de  Anestesiologia,  Botucatu,  SP,BrazilReceived 26  September  2017;  accepted  26  April  2018Available  online  30  June  2018KEYWORDSChild;Anxiety;Psychologicalpreparation;Anesthesia;SurgeryAbstractObjective:  To  verify  the  effect  of  psychological  preparation  on  the  relief  of  preoperative  anxietyin children  and  to  correlate  parents’  and  children’s  levels  of  anxiety.Method:  After  the  approval  of  the  institutional  Research  Ethics  Committee  and  written  consentof the  children’s  parents  or  guardians,  118  children  of  both  genders  were  prospectively  selected,aged between  2  and  8  years,  physical  condition  classification  ASA  I,  who  were  treated  in  thepre-anesthetic  evaluation  ambulatory  of  the  University  Hospital  and  who  underwent  ambula-tory surgeries  at  the  same  hospital.  Two  controlled  groups  of  59  children  were  randomized:control group  basic  preparation  and  psychological  preparation  group.  On  the  day  of  surgery,all selected  children  were  evaluated  regarding  their  level  of  anxiety  using  the  modified  YalePreoperative  Anxiety  Scale  and  their  parents  were  evaluated  regarding  their  level  of  anxietythrough the  Visual  Analog  Scale.  The  evaluator  was  blinded  to  which  study  group  the  child  andfamily member  belonged  to.Results:  Nine  children  and  their  family  members  were  excluded  per  group  when  the  resultswere analyzed.  Children  from  the  prepared  group  showed  significant  reductions  in  their  levelof anxiety  in  relation  to  the  control  group  (p  =  0.04).  There  was  no  correlation  between  thelevel of  anxiety  of  children  and  their  parents’  levels  (p  =  0.78).(cid:2) Please cite this article as: Meletti DP, Meletti JF, Camargo RP, Silva LM, Módolo NS. Psychological preparation reduces preoperativeanxiety in children. Randomized and double-blind trial. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2019;95:545---51.(cid:2)(cid:2) Study conducted at the Master’s Degree Program of Faculdade de Medicina de Jundiaí, São Paulo, SP, Brazil∗ Corresponding author.E-mail: dpmeletti@gmail.com (D.P. Meletti).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jped.2018.05.0090021-7557/© 2018 Sociedade Brasileira de Pediatria. Published by Elsevier Editora Ltda. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-NDlicense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).546 Meletti  DP  et  al.PALAVRAS-CHAVECrianc¸a;Ansiedade;Preparac¸ãopsicológica;Anestesia;CirurgiaConclusion:  The  psychological  preparation  was  effective  in  reducing  the  level  of  anxiety  ofchildren. However,  there  was  no  relation  between  the  level  of  anxiety  of  children  and  theirparents’ level.©  2018  Sociedade  Brasileira  de  Pediatria.  Published  by  Elsevier  Editora  Ltda.  This  is  an  openaccess article  under  the  CC  BY-NC-ND  license  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Preparac¸ão  psicológica  reduz  ansiedade  pré-operatória  de  crianc¸as.  Ensaiorandomizado  e  duplamente  encobertoResumoObjetivos:  Verificar  o  efeito  da  preparac¸ão  psicológica  no  alívio  da  ansiedade  pré-operatóriade crianc¸as  e  avaliar  se  há  correlac¸ão  com  a  ansiedade  dos  pais.Método:  Após  a  aprovac¸ão  do  Comitê  de  Ética  e  Pesquisa  da  Faculdade  de  Medicina  e  obtenc¸ãodo consentimento  pelos  responsáveis  dos  pacientes,  foram  selecionadas  prospectivamente  118crianc¸as, de  ambos  os  sexos,  entre  dois  e  oito  anos,  classificac¸ão  de  estado  físico  ASA  I,  atendidasno ambulatório  de  avaliac¸ão  pré-anestésica  do  Hospital  Universitário  e  submetidas  a  cirurgiasambulatoriais.  Foram  randomizados  dois  grupos  controlados  de  59  crianc¸as:  grupo  de  preparac¸ãobásica e  grupo  preparac¸ão  psicológica.  No  dia  da  cirurgia,  todas  as  crianc¸as  foram  avaliadasem relac¸ão  ao  seu  grau  de  ansiedade  através  da  Escala  de  Ansiedade  Pré-operatória  de  YaleModificada  e  seus  pais,  avaliados  quanto  ao  seu  nível  de  ansiedade  pela  Escala  Visual  Analógica.O avaliador  era  cego  sobre  qual  grupo  do  estudo  a  crianc¸a  e  seu  familiar  pertenciam.Resultados:  Na  análise  dos  resultados,  foram  excluídas  nove  crianc¸as  e  familiares  de  cadagrupo. As  crianc¸as  do  grupo  preparado  tiveram  reduc¸ões  significativas  no  grau  de  ansiedadeem relac¸ão  ao  grupo  controle,  (p  =  0,04).  Não  houve  correlac¸ão  entre  os  graus  de  ansiedadedas crianc¸as  e  seus  pais  (p  =  0,78).Conclusão:  A  preparac¸ão  psicológica  foi  eficaz  na  reduc¸ão  do  grau  de  ansiedade  das  crianc¸asno momento  da  cirurgia.  Não  houve,  entretanto,  relac¸ão  entre  os  graus  de  ansiedade  dos  paise seus  filhos.© 2018  Sociedade  Brasileira  de  Pediatria.  Publicado  por  Elsevier  Editora  Ltda.  Este ´e  um  artigoOpen Access  sob  uma  licenc¸a  CC  BY-NC-ND  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).IntroductionAnxiety  is  present  in  approximately  50%  of  patients  whoundergo  an  anesthetic-surgical  procedure.1 The  prospect  ofpostoperative  pain,  separation  from  family  members,  expo-sure  to  strangers,  fear  of  the  surgery  and  anesthesia,  and  thepossibility  of  becoming  incapacitated  are  factors  that  mayincrease  the  degree  of  anxiety  in  pediatric  patients.2 In  thepreoperative  period,  anxiety  tends  to  manifest  as  feelings  oftension,  nervousness,  worry,  apprehensiveness,  or  psycho-logical  stress.3 Some  children  verbalize  their  dreads,  whileothers  demonstrate  anxiety  through  behavioral  changes,such  as  becoming  restless,  trembling,  breathing  deeply,ceasing  to  speak,  crying,  or  becoming,  in  some  cases,  dif-ficult  to  control.4 In  relation  to  anesthesia,  high  levelsof  anxiety  can  have  negative  effects,  such  as  difficultyin  achieving  anesthetic  induction,  reduction  in  defensesagainst  infections,  and  increase  in  intraoperative  anestheticconsumption  and  postoperative  analgesics.5Diverse  ways  to  alleviate  preoperative  anxiety  have  beenwidely  studied,  such  as  preanesthetic  medications,  dis-traction  techniques,  presence  of  parents  during  anesthesiainduction,  and  preoperative  psychological  and  educationalinterventions.6 The  non-pharmacological  management  ofanxiety  has  advantages  when  compared  to  anxiolytics,  asthey  do  not  have  adverse  events;  however,  further  studiesare  required  to  demonstrate  the  efficacy  of  distraction  tech-niques  such  as  the  use  of  medical  clowns,  videogames,  andcartoons,  among  others.7,8 Psychological  preparation  is  seenas  expensive  due  to  the  need  for  several  sessions;9 however,it  has  good  results  in  reducing  preoperative  anxiety,  as  wellas  in  the  psychological  recovery  of  the  children  and  theirfamily  members  after  the  surgery.10,11Thus,  the  authors  propose  a  single-session  model  of  psy-chological  preparation  for  parents  and  children,  with  themain  objective  of  verifying  the  effect  of  anxiety  reductionin  children  at  the  time  of  the  surgery.  Moreover,  the  authorsproposed  to  investigate  whether  there  would  be  a  correla-tion  between  parents’  and  children’s  anxiety.MethodsClinical  study  description  and  participantsAfter  approval  by  the  Research  Ethics  Committee  of  Facul-dade  de  Medicina  de  Jundiaí  (CAEE:  16288513.2.0000.5412)and  after  the  informed  consent  form  was  signed  by  thepatients’  parents  or  guardians,  118  children  of  both  gen-ders,  aged  between  2 and  8  years,  with  physical  statusPreparation  reduces  preoperative  anxiety  in  children 547classification  according  to  the  American  Association  ofAnesthesiologists  (ASA) I,  treated  at  the  pre-anestheticoutpatient  clinic  of  the  University  Hospital  of  Faculdadede  Medicina  de  Jundiaí,  and  who  underwent  outpatientsurgeries  at  that  hospital  were  selected.  A  randomized,parallel-controlled,  prospective,  and  double-blinded  trialwas  carried  out  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  psychologicalpreparation  on  the  preoperative  anxiety  levels  of  childrenand  their  parents.  The  methodology  was  not  changed  afterthe  study  was  started.AllocationParticipants  were  randomly  allocated  using  the  List  random-izer  program  (Randomness  and  Integrity  Services  Ltd,  Schoolof  Computer  Science  and  Statistics  at  Trinity  College,  Dublin,Ireland).  This  allocation  was  implemented  by  two  anesthe-siologists  responsible  for  the  pre-anesthetic  consultation:they  enrolled  the  participants,  applied  the  exclusion  cri-teria  and  directed  the  participants  to  intervention  whennecessary.  The  exclusion  criteria  were  children  with  provenbehavioral  and  cognitive  alterations;  history  of  previoussurgeries  and  general  anesthesia;  users  of  psychoactivemedications;  and  history  of  seizures,  mental illness,  orchronic  pain.  Five  children  were  excluded  for  these  reasonsand  three  patients  were  excluded  because  their  parents  didnot  agree  to  their  participation  in  the  study  (Fig.  1).InterventionsFrom  November  6,  2014  to  October  5,  2015,  two  groupsof  children  and  their  parents  or  guardians  were  randomlyassigned,  as  described  below:Basic  preparation  group  (BPG):  a  group  that  receivedthe  standard  preparation  at  the  pre-anesthetic  consulta-tion,  where  parents  could  have  their  questions  answered  andreceive  explanations  from  the  anesthesiologist;  as  for  thechildren,  on  the  day  of  surgery,  they  waited  for  the  momentof  surgery  in  the  toy  library,  a  place  with  toys  and  booksreserved  for  them  and  their  family  members.Psychological  preparation  group  (PPG):  a  group  that,  inaddition  to  the  basic  preparation,  underwent  a  psycholog-ical  interview  always  performed  by  the  same  psychologist,after  the  pre-anesthetic  consultation,  with  the  presence  ofthe  family  member  and  the  child.  Parents  were  briefed  onthe  aspects  of  the  surgery  and  the  separation  that  wouldoccur  when  the  child  entered  the  operating  room,  aiming  tohelp  them  cope  with  these  situations.  A  story  was  told  to  thechild,  with  the  support  of  a  children’s  book  entitled  ‘‘Gasparin  the  hospital’’  by  Anne  Gutman  and  Georg  Hallensleben,published  by  Cosacnaif.  Gaspar  is  a  child  character  whosuffers  an  accident  and  needs  to  undergo  an  emergencysurgery.12 He  was  at  school  and  is  taken  to  the  hospital  byambulance  alone.  He  needs  to  be  operated  on  and  duringanesthesia  he  sleeps  and  has  a  good  dream.  The  book  high-lights  Gaspar’s  courage  and  independence,  how  happy  heis  with  his  dream  and  when  he  wakes  up,  how  happy  he  isto  see  his  mother.  The  approach  used  with  the  child  is  thatof  coping  with  a  new  situation  without  the  presence  of  theparents.Psychological  preparationFour  main  questions  were  addressed  with  the  parents  orfamily  members  present  in  the  psychological  session  usinga  semi-open  interview  model,  i.e., the  questions  were  nec-essarily  the  same,  but  the  interview  varied  according  to  thefamily  responses  and  demands.  The  first  question  addressedthe  feelings  about  the  surgery  by  the  parent  and  the  child;specifically  asking  for  the  verbalization  of  feelings  such  asfear,  anxiety,  concern  and  others  as  an  initial  approach.In  the  second  question,  adult  aspects  were  questionedregarding  the  mother-child,  or  father-child  separation,  fromsimple  separations  such  as  leaving  the  child  with  a  relativefor  a  few  hours,  adaptation  to  school,  and  other  separationexperiences.  The  third  question  addressed  how  the  motheror  father  perceived  and  dealt  with  the  child’s  health  and  ill-ness  situations,  and  the  last  question  addressed  the  child’sattachment  to  objects.  This  session  with  the  parents  wasused  to  guide  and  to  calm  them  down  regarding  the  anesthe-sia  and  surgery  aspects,  as  well  as  to  support  the  children’sseparation  from  their  parents,  so  they  would  feel  confidentgoing  into  the  operating  room.MeasuresAt  the  pre-anesthetic  evaluation  outpatient  clinic,  on  theday  of  the  consultation,  the  following  tools  were  applied  tothe  parents:  a  questionnaire  to  assess  the  sociodemographicprofile,  a  questionnaire  about  the  role  of  the  anesthe-siologist,  the  parents’  apprehensions  and  fears  relatedto  anesthesia  and  assessment  of  their  degree  of  anxietythrough  the  visual  analogue  scale  (VAS).  Such  scale,  used  asa  secondary  outcome  measure,  was  also  applied  to  parentsor  guardians  at  the  time  of  the  surgery.  The  scale  mea-sured  100  mm,  where  0  (zero)  was  equivalent  to  ‘‘calm’’and  100  mm  meant  ‘‘very  anxious.’’13 Mild  anxiety  wasexpressed  by  the  scores  0,  1,  and  2;  moderate  anxiety,  3,4,  5,  6,  and  7;  and  intense  anxiety,  8,  9,  and  10.On  the  day  of  the  surgery,  all  children  selected  from  bothgroups  were  referred  to  the  toy  library  attached  to  the  surgi-cal  center,  where  their  anxiety  levels  were  assessed  throughthe  modified  Yale  Preoperative  Anxiety  Scale  (m-YPAS).This  observational  scale  consists  of  27  items  divided  intofive  categories:  activity,  vocalization,  emotional  expression,apparent  awakening  state,  and  family  interaction.  The  scoreranges  from  23.5  to  100;  when  above  30,  the  higher  thescore,  the  greater  the  anxiety.14 The  m-YPAS  Scale  wasapplied  continuously,  from  the  pre-anesthetic  preparationroom  at  the  time  of  the  child’s  separation  from  the  parentsto  the  moment  of  anesthetic  induction,  and  was  performedby  a  single  and  the  same  resident  physician  in  anesthesiol-ogy,  under  the  supervision  of  the  anesthesiologist  in  chargefor  the  division,  after  previous  training.  The  evaluator  wasblinded  to  the  child’s  group.The  basic  protocol  of  anesthetic  induction  was  performedin  a  closed-loop  anesthesia  delivery  system  with  33%  O2 and66%  N2O,  with  a  total  flow  of  5  L.min-1 for  one  minute,  fol-lowed  by  administration  of  sevoflurane  at  8%.  After  the  childlost  consciousness,  the  gas  flow  was  reduced  to  2  L  min−1 andthe  anesthetic  concentration,  to  2---3%.548 Meletti  DP  et  al.Eligible patients:  118Randomized: 110Excluded: 8Did not meet the inclusioncriteria: 5 Refused to participate: 3Allocated to the psychologicalpreparation group (PPG): 55 Exclude d aft er all ocation:Yale sc ale was not  applied:  3Surgery was cancelled: 2 50 chil dren psychological  prepa  were analyz ed for theration groupAllocated to  the  BasicPreparation Group (BPG): 55 Exclu ded  aft er  all ocation:Yale scale was not applied: 4 Surgery was cancelled: 1 50  children were ana basic preparation group lyz ed for theFigure  1 Flowchart  according  to  the  CONSORT  randomization  guidelines  and  participants’  study.Sample  size  determination  and  statistical  analysisResultsAfter  the  110  children  were  allocated  in  both  groups,  fivechildren  from  each  group  were  lost  to  follow-up  due  tosurgery  cancellation  or  non-application  of  the  anxiety  scaleon  the  day  of  the  surgery.  The  final  analysis  was  restrictedto  50  children  from  each  studied  group.in  children Considering  that  the  prevalence  of  anxiety  in  the  oper-is  50%1 and  that  the  proposedating  room intervention  was  able  to  reduce  children’s  anxiety  by  20%(cid:2)-errorafter  a  pilot  study  with  20  children,  and  using  an (cid:3)-error  of  20%,  and  95%  confidence  interval  (95%of  5%, CI),  the  number  of  patients  was  determined  at  42  in  eachgroup,  totaling  a  number  of  84  participants  in  the  proposedstudy.The  statistical  analysis  was  performed  using  the  soft-ware  Stata/SE  version  9.0  for  Windows  (Stata  Corporation---  College  Station,  Texas,  USA).  In  the  analysis  of  groups,medians  and  the  25---75%  percentiles  were  used  as  ameasure  of  central tothe  non-normal  distribution  trend  of  the  sample  sep-arated in  groups.  Categorical  variables  were  shown  asabsolute  values  and  percentages.  Histograms  and  theShapiro---Wilk  test  were  used  to  verify  the  symmetry  of  datadistribution.tendency  and  variability  due The  chi-squared  test  and  Fisher’s  exact  test  were  usedfor  categorical  variables,  and  the  chi-squared  partition  wasperformed  if  p-value  was  less  than  0.05  (significance  levelused).  The  comparisons  between  two  groups  for  continuousor  ordinal  variables  were  performed  using  the  Mann-Whitneytest.Spearman’s  correlation  was  used  to  evaluate  the  associ-ation  intensity  of  ordinal  variables  in  the  same  individual.The  groups  were  homogeneous  regarding  gender,  age,  levelof  schooling,  and  type  of  surgery.  In  both  groups,  a  preva-lence  of  boys  for  both  groups  and  children  attendingpreschool  was  observed  (Table  1).No  significant  differences  were  found  regarding  theparents’  characteristics  (chi-squared  test)  when  the  twogroups  were  compared  regarding  gender  (p  =  0.76),  school-ing  (p  =  0.39),  income  (p  =  0.32),  occupation  (p  =  0.20),  andmarital  status  (p  =  0.36).  Most  interviewees  were  women(87%),  who  were  generally  the  mothers,  had  finished  highschool  (39%),  belonged  to  the  middle  class  (57%),  and  wereemployed  (58%)  and  married  (77%).When  comparing  the  groups,  both  parents  and  childrenfrom  the  PPG  group  had  significantly  lower  anxiety  levels  atthe  time  of  surgery  when  compared  with  parents  and  chil-dren  from  the  BPG.  There  was  no  difference  between  theparents’  level  of  anxiety  assessed  by  the  VAS  at  the  time  ofthe  preanesthetic  consultation  (Table  2).There  was  no  correlation  between  parental  anxiety  at  thetime  of  surgery  and  the  children’s  anxiety  the  two  studiedgroups  (r  =  0.0276,  p  =  0.78;  Fig.  2).None  of  the  children’s  demographic  data,  such  as  gender(p  =  0.20),  age  (p  =  0.88),  and  level  of  schooling  (p  =  0.52;chi-squared  test)  presented  a  significant  association  withanxiety.DiscussionThis  clinical  trial  demonstrated  that  the  children  and  theirparents  who  received  psychological  preparation  care  in  a  Preparation  reduces  preoperative  anxiety  in  children Table  1 Characteristics  of  the  study  children:  comparison  by  group.Variables Gender Male Female Child’s age ≥2  and >4 and >6 and ≤4 ≤6≤8Child’s level  of  schooling No  schooling Daycare Pre-school First grade Second gradeType of  surgery  performedPostectomy Thyroglossal  cyst  correction Inguinal  herniorrhaphy Umbilical  herniorrhaphy Nevus  excision Adenoamigdalectomy Basic  Preparation  GroupBPGFrequency  and  percentagePsychological  PreparationGroupPPGFrequency  and  percentage44(88) 6  (12) 27  (54) 1  5(30) 8  (16)5  (10) 10  (20) 21  (42) 8  (16) 6  (12) 19  (38) 0 4  (8) 7  (14) 3  (6) 17  (34) 43(86)7  (14)18  (36)21  (42)11  (22)5  (10)5  (10)20  (40)12  (24)8  (16)22  (44) 3  (6) 7  (14) 5  (10) 1  (2) 12  (24) a Yates’ chi-squared test.b Fisher’s exact test.Values expressed as frequency and percentage (%); p < 0.05.Table  2 group.Scales Parents’  and  children’s  anxiety:  comparison  byBPGMedian  andpercentilesPPGMedian  andpercentilesp-valueVAS  (consulta-8  (6.75---10) 7  (5---10) tion)VAS (surgery) m-YPAS 9  (7---10) 33.4(23.4---45.85)7  (5---10) 26.6(23.4---33.4)0.120.010.04Mann---Whitney test.Values expressed as medians and percentiles (25---75%).single  session  had  their  preoperative  degree  of  anxiety  sig-nificantly  reduced  when  compared  with  the  group  that  didnot  receive  this  care  (p  =  0.04  for  the  children  and  =  0.01  forparents  at  the  time  of  surgery).The  preparation  was  focused  on  alleviating  separationanxiety  in  young  children.  According  to  the  care  protocolused  at  the  University  Hospital  where  this  study  was  per-formed,  the  parents  did  not  accompany  their  children  duringanesthetic  induction,  and  the  separation  took  place  at  thetoy  library  attached  to  the  surgical  ward.  The  authors  con-sider  the  age  limit  of  8  years  as  a  predisposing  factor  to  thisanxiety,15 due  to  the  peculiar  fact  that  children  between  6months  and  4  years  of  age  manifest  a  greater  intensity  ofileacSytexnAevitarepoerPeaYdeifidoMl120100806040201 3 57 Visual Analogue Scale – Anxiety before the surgeryFigure  2 Correlation  between  the  parents’  anxiety  (VAS)scale at  the  time  of  surgery  and  the  modified  Yale  Preoper-ative  Anxiety  Scale  (m-YPAS)  applied  in  children.  Spearman’scorrelation:  p  =  0.78.seizures  and  the  fear  of  separation  from  parents  still  remainin  some  children  between  the  ages  of  4---8  years.15In  his  review  article,  Moro16 discusses  the  question  of  agerelated  to  preoperative  anxiety  and  concludes  that  there  isstill  no  consensus  on  the  subject.  The  literature  containssome  assertions  that  younger  children,  up  to  6  years  of  age,549p-value0.76a0.19a0.59a0.684a0.242b0.523a0.758a0.617b0.378a911  550 Meletti  DP  et  al.are  more  likely  to  suffer  from  preoperative  anxiety  relatedto  separation.  Older  children,  however,  would  be  more  con-cerned  with  the  surgery  itself.  Some  studies  have  reportedthat  older  children  are  more  anxious,  and  other  authors  didnot  find  any  evidence  related  to  age.16 In  the  present  study,no  differences  regarding  an  age-related  degree  of  anxietywere  observed;  younger  children  between  2  and  4  years,or  those  aged  5  and  6  years,  were  no  more  anxious  thanthose  aged  7  and  8  years  (p  =  0.08).  Similarly  to  the  presentresults,  Wollin  et  al.17 found  no  significance  in  the  associa-tion  between  anxiety  and  the  children’s  age  between  5  and12  years  ---  they  divided  the  children  into  age  groups:  5---6years,  7---10  years,  and  11---12  years.  The  present  authorstherefore  believe  that  maintaining  the  focus  on  the  separa-tion  anxiety  approach  for  the  age  group  of  2---8  years  reducedthe  number  of  consultations  to  a  single  session.Kain  et  al.  performed  a  family-centered  preparation.9In  this  intervention,  parents  received  counseling  throughvideos,  booklets,  or  by  telephone,  and  the  children  receiveda  surprise  box  at  the  time  of  anesthetic  induction;  their  par-ents  were  monitored  by  a  researcher  who  asked  them  to  useplanned  distraction  strategies  for  children,  if  necessary.  Thisadvanced  preparation  group  presented  superior  results  inreducing  the  children’s  anxiety  in  comparison  with  the  otherstudy  groups  that  were  not  submitted  to  this  preparation.Although  the  trial  concluded  that  the  psychologicalpreparation  significantly  contributed  to  the  reduction  ofpreoperative  anxiety  in  children,  the  program  was  expensiveand  feasible  only  in  large  hospitals.  Moreover,  because  ofthe  complexity  involved,  it  was  not  clear  which  componentwould  be  essential  in  this  preparation.Another  study,  comparing  children  who  underwent  a  pre-operative  psychological  preparation  to  a  group  of  childrenwho  did  not  receive  this  type  of  care  showed  that  thegroup  of  children  trained  by  the  psychologist  had  loweranxiety  levels  than  those  who  underwent  only  distractiontechniques.18 Another  trial19 evaluated  the  psychologist’spresence  at  the  time  of  anesthetic  induction  and  concludedthis  method  was  more  effective  in  reducing  anxiety  in  chil-dren  when  compared  with  distraction  techniques.  In  thatstudy,  it  was  necessary  to  have  the  presence  of  a  profes-sional  psychologist,  who  is  part  of  the  surgical  team,  onlyfor  this  in-person  support  during  anesthetic  induction.  In  thepresent  study,  the  preparation  aimed  to  enable  the  child  toface  the  moment  of  surgery  alone,  but  with  the  support  ofthe  existing  team.Regarding  the  aspect  of  an  association  between  thedegree  of  anxiety  of  the  parents  and  their  children inthe  preoperative  period,  the  present*  study  did  not  showsuch  correlation.  Another  clinical  trial20 also  failed  toobserve  such  association,  but  its  result  was  attributed  tothe  restricted  number  of  participants.  Cui  et  al.21 demon-strated  a  correlation  between  the  anxiety  of  parents  andtheir  children  younger  than  4  years  during  anesthetic  induc-tion.  It  could  be  suggested  that  this  difference  in  resultswas  due  to  the  fact  that  the  mean  age  of  the  children  in  thepresent  study  was  higher.  According  to  Nascimento,22 theremay  be  differences  in  the  correlations  between  parents’  andchildren’s  anxiety  levels  regarding  their  age  group.The  present  study  had  some  limitations.  In  the  postop-erative  period,  the  children’s  behaviors  and  need  for  painmedication  were  not  assessed  and,  therefore,  it  was  notpossible  to  verify  the  extent  of  the  benefits  in  this  psycho-logical  preparation  model.  It  was  also  not  possible  to  matchthe  genders  in  the  studied  groups,  which  predominantly  con-sisted  of  boys,  due  to  the  high  frequency  of  postectomies  inthe  service.  The  psychological  preparation  for  preanestheticmedication  use  was  not  compared,  and  ethical  reasonsprevented  the  creation  of  a  control  group  without  any  pre-anesthetic  preparation.  Children  who  received  psychologicalpreparation  were  compared  with  children  awaiting  surgeryin  a  toy  library,  since  it  has  already  been  shown  that  toyshelp  reduce  anxiety.3,23,24Finally,  the  study  could  have  selected  parents  and  chil-dren  with  a  high  risk  of  anxiety  based  on  the  informationcollected  during  the  psychological  consultation  and  comparethem  to  the  anxiety  assessed  by  VAS  and  YALE  scale  at  thetime  of  surgery.  This  prognosis  would  have  been  useful  inestimating  which  parents  and  children  would  need  a  morecomprehensive  approach  with  more  than  one  session.  Theauthors  suggest  this  approach  for  future  studies.Children  in  the  PPG  and  their  parents  benefited  from  theanxiety  reduction  when  compared  to  the  group  that  did  notreceive  this  preparation.  Therefore,  the  authors  concludethat  a  single  psychological  session  was  effective  in  preparingparents  and  children  for  separation  anxiety  and  coping  withthe  surgical  procedure  in  most  cases.  This  result  has  prac-tical  and  clinical  importance  and  thus,  this  approach  wasshown  to  be  as  effective  as  programs  that  rely  on  multiplesessions.FundingThe  study  was  registered  in  the  Registro  de  Ensaios  ClínicosBrasileiros.  Primary  Identifier:  RBR-5jh9sf.Conflicts of  interestThe  authors  declare  no  conflicts  of  interest.References1. Davidson AJ, Shirivastava PP, Jansen K, Huang GH, CzarnekiC, Gibson MA, et al. Risk factors for anxiety at induction ofanesthesia in children: a prospective cohort study. PaediatricAnaesth. 2006;16:919---27.2. Maranets I, Kain ZN. Preoperative anxiety and intraoperativeanesthetic requirements. Anesth Analg. 1999;89:1346---51.3. Weber FS. The influence of playful activities on children’s anx-iety during the preoperative period at the outpatient surgicalcenter. J Pediatr. 2010;86:209---14.4. Kain ZN, Mayes LC. Anxiety in children during the perioperativeperiod. In: Borenstein M, Genevro JL, editors. Child devel-opment and behavioral pediatrics. Mahwah, New Jersey: L.Erlbaum Associates; 1996. p. 85---103.5. Guaratini AA, Marcolino JA, Teixeira AB, Bernardis RC, PassarelliML, Mathias L. Estudo transversal de ansiedade pré-operatóriaem crianc¸as: utilizac¸ão da Escala de Yale modificada. Rev BrasAnestesiol. 2006;56:591---601.6. Ahmed MI, Farrel MA, Parrish K, Karla A. Preoperative anxiety inchildren --- risk factors and non-pharmacological management.M E J Anesth. 2011;21:153---70.Preparation  reduces  preoperative  anxiety  in  children 5517. Yip P, Middleton P, Cyna AM, Carlyle AV. Non-pharmacologicalinterventions for assisting the induction of anaesthesia in chil-dren. Evid Based Child Health. 2011;6:71---134.J, Anderson B, editors. A practice of anesthesia for infants andchildren. 5th ed. Canada: Saunders; 2013.16. Moro ET, Módulo NS. Children, parents and anxiety. Rev Bras8. Manyande A, Cyna AM, Yip P, Chooi C, Middleton P. Non-inductionfor assisting in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.interventions the pharmacological of anaesthesia 2015:CD006447.9. Kain ZN, Caldwell-Andrews AA, Mayes LC, Weinberg ME, WangSM, MacLaren JE, et al. Family-centered preparation for surgeryimproves perioperative outcomes in children. Anesthesiology.2007;106:65---74.10. Gorayeb RP, Petean EB, Pileggi FO, Tazima MF, Vicente YA,Gorayeb R. Importance of psychological intervention for therecovery of children submitted to elective surgery. J PediatrSurg. 2009;44:1390---5.11. Hilly J, Hörlin A-L, Kinderf J, Ghez C, Menrath S, DelivetH, et al. Preoperative preparation workshop reduces postop-erative maladaptive behavior in children. Paediatr Anaesth.2015;25:990---8.12. Gutman A, Hallensleben G. Gaspar no Hospital. 2nd ed. SãoPaulo: Cosac Naify; 2010.13. Kindler CH, Harms C, Amsler F, Ihde-School T, Scheidegger D.The visual analog scale allows effective measurement of pre-operative anxiety and detection of patients. Anesth Analg.2000;90:706---12.14. Kain ZN, Mayes LC, Cicchetti DV, Bagnall AL, Finley JD, Hofs-tadter MB. The Yale Preoperative Anxiety Scale: does it comparewith a ‘‘gold standard’’? Anesth Analg. 1997;85:783---8.15. Ghazal EA, Mason LJ, Coté CJ. Preoperative evaluation pre-medication and induction of anesthesia. In: Cote CJ, LermanAnestesiol. 2004;54:728---38.17. Wollin SR, Plummer JL, Owen H, Hawkins MF, Materazzo F. Pre-dictors of preoperative anxiety in children. Anaesth IntensiveCare. 2003;31:69---74.18. Cuzzocrea F, Costa S, Gugliandolo MC, Larcan R. Psychologistsin preoperative programmes for children undergoing surgery. JChild Health Care. 2016;20:164---73.19. Cuzzocrea F, Gugliandolo MC, Larcan R, Romeo C, Turi-aco N, Dominici T. A psychological preoperative program:effects on anxiety and cooperative behaviors. Paediatr Anaesth.2013;23:139---43.20. Vagnoli L, Caprilli S, Robiglio A, Messeri A. Clown doctors as atreatment for preoperative anxiety in children: a randomized,prospective study. Pediatrics. 2005;116:563---7.21. Cui X, Zhu B, Zhao J, Huang Y, Luo A, Wei  J. Parental state anx-iety correlates with preoperative anxiety in Chinese preschoolchildren. J Paediatr Child Health. 2016;52:649---55.22. Nascimento CR [dissertation] Relac¸ões entre a resposta deansiedade de pais e a resposta de ansiedade de seus filhos. PortoAlegre (RS): Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul; 1998.23. Golden L, Pagala M, Sukhavasi S, Nagpal D, Ahmad A, MahantaA. Giving toys to children reduces their anxiety about receivingpremedication for surgery. Anesth Analg. 2006;102:1070---2.24. Aydin GB, Yuksel S, Ergil J, Polat R, Akelma FK, Ekici M,et al. The effect of play distraction on anxiety before pre-medication administration: a randomized trial. J Clin Anesth.2016;36:27---31.