ELSEVIER Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 Artificial Intelligence A dynamical systems perspective on agent-environment interaction Randall D. Beer* Dept. of Computer Engineering and Science and Dept. of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA Received September 1992; revised March 1993 Abstract agents is sketched. Using the language of dynamical systems theory, a general theoretical are modeled as two coupled dynamical systems whose mutual interaction synthesis and analysis of autonomous its environment in general an agent and constraint on the trajectories of the coupled agent-environment framework behavior for the In this framework, an agent and is the adaptive fit between in terms of the satisfaction of a given system. The utility of this it to first synthesize and then analyze a walking is demonstrated for a legged agent. for the agent’s behavior. jointly responsible is characterized its environment In addition, framework by using 1. Introduction agent, long-term in continuous its environment. By autonomous agent and system designed This paper is concerned with properly characterizing the interaction between an I mean any to satisfy internal or external goals by its own actions in which it is autonomous embodied while situated. The class of autonomous agents is thus a fairly broad one, encompassing robots. An animal, for example, may at the very least all animals and autonomous simply be trying to survive, while a robot might be designed to carry out specific tasks, such as keeping some designated area clean or exploring the surface of another planet. The task is thus to abstract over particular details of implementa- tion and embodiment motors) (e.g., nerve cells vs. finite state machines or muscles vs. the essential character of this class of systems. interaction with the environment to understand in order * E-mail: beer@alpha.ces.cwru.edu 0004-3702/95/$09.50 SSDI 0004-3702(94)00005-L 0 1995 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved short of this ambitious the present paper may fall, the long-term less than a general framework for the explanation and goal theoretical However aim design of autonomous is nothing The central problem agents. for any autonomous is the generation its internal state and external agent, action must always reasoning, when it can be afforded reflected agent must situation. in improved be purely Rather, it means agent, of the appropriate situation take precedence and thus behavior continuously the primary concern at the appropriate change. For an activity. at all, is profitable over any other only behavior. This does not necessarily responding to agent must be able reflexively an autonomous reactive, insofar as it is that an imply its only to goals so as to its long-term to both. An animal moving circumstances with in ways appropriate combine its immediate its behavior adjust its environment, for example, needs to adopt many different modes of as it becomes all the while adjusting hungry or tired and encounters its posture and leg movements potential food, predators to the constantly in this paper, time as both embodied Abstract ultimately embodied immediate flexibly continuously throughout behavior and mates, changing terrain which Traditionally, such “low symbolic the problems skills, agents, when in AI research. role intellectual major level” ing. Embodied as merely Accordingly, special cases of the problems long been Sensors, consistency while effecters introduce actual motor commands. constraints reasoning. complicating, on an agent’s However, rather realized for example, of, internal these than In recent years, however, developed for this change the fundamental to be considerably appreciate reasons real world with out approaches to the noisy, unpredictable, Furthermore, have turned environment. number to control that of visual problems the potentially it is traversing. level” Instead, work such as language, concerns of embodiment in AI has tended solving problem they have been considered sensors engines with reasoning have not played to emphasize and abstract a “high reason- at all, have been viewed attached. and effecters of embodied agents have usually been formulated that embodiment introduce raises the problem of disembodied systems. Of course, intelligent certain of constructing, additional technical and maintaining representations the problem Furthermore, that action technical of the environment from physical representations of action of translating physical embodiment limit the amount problems of time are usually introduces real-time that can be spent as merely seen as it has issues. the signals, into invalidating, the classical picture. a growing number importance in perspective. Designing of embodiment. agents of AI researchers the versatility and robustness subtle for disembodied of even simple animals than originally agents have not in general and difficult more many problems out Work on animate to be considerably open-ended that seemed and dynamic intractable simplified by active vision, are drastically for example, simplified if the agent [8]. Likewise, work on situated its own gaze direction brittle and combinatorially explosive There have begun are a number to of that can interact with the has turned and translated well of the real world. systems in an that a participation has demonstrated nature for disembodied realized, is given the ability agents has shown of general nature R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 175 [3,20]. Indeed, planning can be significantly alleviated by using the immediate situation behavior complication fundamental thought capacity for language and abstract much more basic capacity for situated action that is universal among animals. to guide that, far from being a mere intellect, embodiment may in fact be the more the human from an evolutionary recent elaboration of a for a disembodied issue. Certainly, there is a growing realization is a relatively perspective, the and situated to point out agents. Brooks, working emphasis on embodiment This reassessment of the importance of embodiment has led to an explosion of in the area of mobile recent work on autonomous limitations of robotics, was one of the first AI researchers in the face of real-world complexity and the need for a classical AI techniques renewed [18,20]. Agre and Chapman’s work on routine activity grew out of a similar frustration with the to similar limitations of classical planning conclusions [56], Rosenschein for deriving finite state machine for an agent from a formal specification of its knowledge and goals controllers the significant [42]. My own work [ll, 141 and that of Cliff [24] has demonstrated potential agent research and work on the neural basis of animal behavior. Biological design principles have also been stressed by Arbib and Liaw [5]. Surveys of recent work in autonomous agents can be found [2,3,22]. Building on Rosenschein’s and Kaelbling developed methods in the collections edited by Maes [45] and Meyer and Wilson [49]. for interaction between autonomous in realistic environments situated automata theory action and led rather This body of work is loosely characterized agents capable of carrying out open-ended ideas. It by a number of shared taking action in the world over the abstract of tasks than isolated cognitive skills in restricted the primacy of actually that we sometimes make of it. It focuses on the development emphasizes descriptions complete It environments situa- emphasizes behavior and the fundamental tion plays associated with behaviorism, over reasoning and symbolic models of the world. Another common theme of this work has been that a significant fraction of behavior must be seen as an emerging from the ongoing interaction between an agent and its environment, idea often associated with cybernetics. This work has also begun to question the central to play in intelligent behavior by most work in cognitive science. in unconstrained task domains. in guiding an agent’s behavior, that the immediate has been assumed role that internal ideas historically representation importance ideas theoretical I will attempt In this paper, these and other that are to show that emerging from recent work on autonomous agents, as well as work on the neural basis of animal behavior, can be naturally cast into the language of dynamical I will argue that this language can form the basis for systems theory. Furthermore, a powerful agents systems theory theoretical the quences. Section 4 demonstrates some detail its application simulated for the explanation and design of autonomous in general. Section 2 reviews some of the basic concepts of dynamical In Section 3, I sketch conse- in to the synthesis and analysis of a walking behavior for a the assumptions of the this framework. itself and draw out some of its conceptual legged agent. Finally, Section 5 discusses the utility of this framework by illustrating that are required framework framework to present proposed directions framework, for future work. considers its broader implications, and suggests some 2. Dynamical systems This section will briefly review theory of dynamical to be presented qualitative framework and incomplete. to one of the many increasing mathematical Hale and KoGak [33] and Wiggins The reader available the essential concepts and that will be required systems in Section 3. The presentation thorough interested systems in a more texts on dynamical terminology for the is necessarily treatment including, of the theoretical informal should refer in order of [l], sophistication, the books by Abraham and Shaw [66]. Consider the following three mathematical systems: X ,r+, =PX,,(l -“n) 2 ,nl$j+~~+mfisinB=Acos(w*) At first glance, first equation The second-order sinusoidally-driven input. However, the underlying these these three systems may appear is an example of an differential equation The all of these systems pendulum. to have very little iterated map. The second of describing the motion is a finite third system are also instances of dynamical one might ask about state machine with systems and each of similarity of many of the questions systems only becomes in this formalism. apparent a dynamical law 5 system that governs For our purposes here, change with the system’s is continuous variables x and a dynamical variables constitutes state space the concepts Often Sometimes, cylindrical variables the geometry however, and toroidal are periodic that If the dynamical of some values time. The set of all possible state space. For simplicity, (i.e., I will be introducing the of other spaces arise. Perhaps the state variables space in some is assumed state hold is characterized by a set of state how the values of those state values of the state variables I will assume here that the though most of space. for any metric to be simply Euclidean. are real-valued), form the most common are state spaces, which occur naturally when some of the state (e.g., 0 in Eq. law depends only upon fixed parameters the values of the state variables and the to be examples is said system (2)). then the a, set of (1) (2) (3) in common. system a damped, is a R. D. Beer I Artijicial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 177 In a continuous-time dynamical system, the dynamical law is given autonomous.’ in terms of a set of differential equations: i = 9(x; u). In this case, the dynamical law defines a vector field on the state space. In a discrete-time dynamical system, to next state: x,+, = the dynamical 9(x,; u). A dynamical system is said to be linear or nonlinear according to the linearity or nonlinearity of 9 law is simply a map from current in the state variables. state As a concrete example, consider the behavior of a fully-interconnected the following system of equations, which network of two simple model describe neurons: I;, = -Y I + wll4Yl- 4) + W2ldY2 - %I 7 Y, = -Y, + wlP(Y, - 4) + w224y2 - 4) ) (4) ith neuron, where yi is the state of the is the standard sigmoidal (S-shaped) activation function, 0, controls the offset or threshold of the from the ith to the jth activation neuron. This system is a simplification of a common neural network model that will be employed system due to the in Section 4. Note that this is a nonlinear nonlinearity of the activation function and wj, is the weight of the connection a(t) = (1 + ee5)-’ function (+. to Starting to individual representative that point. Some that its tangent at each point from some initial state x0, the sequence of states generated by the law is called a trajectory of the system and is often is action of the dynamical denoted &(x0). A trajectory has the property field at equal the vector the value of (4) are shown in Fig. 1. The set of all such trajectories of the two-node network through every point in the state space is called the flow, denoted &. trajectories In the classical theory of differential equations, one is typically interested only in individual solutions, which correspond trajectories of the dynamical system. In contrast, theory of dynamical systems, one is usually in the qualitative interested more Of particular in the geometrical or topological structure of the entire flow. interest is the possible long-term behavior of a dynamical system. The state of some systems will simply diverge to infinity (e.g., the system ,’ = y), to limit sets. A limit set is a set of points that while others will eventually converge law, so that if the state of a dynamical is invariant with respect law will keep it there system ever falls on a limit set, the action of the dynamical indefinitely. The stable important. An attractor has the property that the trajectories passing through all nearby states to the attractor. This means that if the state of the system is perturbed a converge law sufficiently small distance away from an attractor, will bring that its basin of attraction. Those portions of converge itself are the trajectories the action of the dynamical to the attractor. The open set of initial states through such points which do not lie on the attractor the state back to a given attractor limit sets or &tractors to the dynamical are especially is termed ’ This is a technical “autonomous agents”. term in dynamical systems theory whose meaning is unrelated to its use in the term 178 R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (199.5) 173-215 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 Yi c 4. 2, 0. -2. -4. Y2 2 4 6 Yl 8 10 Yl (Eq. system is, the qualitative and that (0,O) stable, (A) H ere are structurally in the parameters. for the two-neuron (4, -3) with basins of attraction Fig. 1. Phase portraits systems small variations (-3,4) near the two basins of attraction. Here w12 = -6, wz2 = w2, = 6, 8, = 6, 0, = 0. (C) Here repellor increasing The parameter a single equilibrium the single parameter the system exhibits (open point near wI1 from 2.75 is a repeller and the inset of this repellor persist in gray and white of their phase portraits two stable equilibrium respectively. (4)) f or several parameter structures the system exhibits shown settings. All of these for points near The open point between line) forms values are wl, = IV,, = 4, w,* = wzl = -3, 8, = 0, = 0. (B) values are wI1 = 2.75, (dark oval) and a in B by a limit cycle from point attractor. The parameter (dark diagonal the separatrix the one shown the system exhibits (6,O)). This phase portrait was derived to 6. R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 179 called transients. The solid point near (-3,4) and its basin of attraction attractor, is shown in gray. in Fig. l(A) is an example of an itself trajectories is invariant, them. Despite it away. The open point near (0,O) from if the state of the system Repellers are limit sets that are unstable. Repellors have the property the fact diverge that at that the least some nearby even an repellor law will serve infinitesimal distance from the repellor, to carry is an example of a repellor. Attractors are important because they govern the long-term behavior of initial state, a physically embodied the any physical dynamical transients have after repellors can only be observed by starting a passed. Due dynamical system on a repellor and then never perturbing it. Since any physical system has some noise, it could never stay on a repellor the action of the dynamical in Fig. l(A) system will always be found near an attractor system. Regardless is perturbed indefinitely. instability, to their of Four major classes of attractors are usually distinguished. Equilibrium point are stable limit sets which consist of single points, such as the solid attractors in Fig. l(A). An equilibrium point x* represents a constant point near (4, -3) to the system: 4,(x*) =x*. Periodic attractors or limit cycles are stable solution to limit sets which are closed trajectories periodic or oscillatory solutions, with the property that 4,(x*) = 4t+T(~*) for some minimum period T > 0 and any point x* lying on the attractor. An example of a limit cycle is shown in Fig. l(C). in the state space. These correspond attractors The remaining are much more complicated two classes of limit sets, quasiperiodic and chaotic than either equilibrium points or limit attractors, cycles. Chaotic attractors, for example, possess a fractal structure and they exhibit a sensitive dependence on initial conditions. No matter how closely two unequal initial states are chosen, their resulting trajectories can diverge exponentially even while remaining bounded on the attractor until they become completely uncorre- law, lated. For this reason, despite from a the behavior of a chaotic attractor further random process. While I will not discuss quasiperiodic or chaotic attractors in this paper, is quite that such complicated behavior common to realize in higher dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems. the underlying determinism of its dynamical is in many ways indistinguishable it is important In general, attractors, separated separating attractors separatrices each containing cellular structure the state space of a dynamical system will contain multiple by its own basin of attraction. These basins are each surrounded by unstable manifolds line called separatrices. The dark diagonal the white and gray basins of attraction of the two equilibrium point in Fig. l(A) is an example of a separatrix. Thus one can visualize these as dividing the flow of a dynamical system into a number of “cells” of this type. A global characterization an attractor of some is called the phase portrait of the system (Fig. 1). We have been holding the parameters u of the dynamical considering parameters determines, state space, will most certainly change as these parameters law 9 constant and the global structure of the resulting flow. What happens when these are changed? Since 9 it and hence the resulting flow 4, that this vector field induces on the are varied. Thus a is a function of U, the vector field that parameterized any particular dynamical flow corresponding law actually defines a family of dynamical systems, with to a single setting of the parameters. Just as we were previously interested in the structure of any given of a family of flows flow in state in parameter is, for most parameter systems are structurally stable, that in the parameter values will produce into inquire the structure space, we can now space. Most dynamical settings, small changes flow. Limit sets and basins of attraction may deform the new homeomorphic) systems parameter that are qualitatively types of limit sets are called bifurcations. values can cause drastic changes flow will be qualitatively to the old one. However, can become different similar from (i.e., in the flow, producing the original. These qualitative at certain parameter structurally unstable, so that even infinitesimal and move around topologically small changes in the a bit, but or equivalent, values, dynamical in changes phase portraits changes in the For example, as the parameter I+, , in our example the repelling therefore flows, and stable bifurcations 2.75 to 6, the equilibrium bifurcates into bifurcation, structurally complicated dividing different structurally dynamical point attractor point and the structurally around occurs can occur. Thus, shown in Fig. limit cycle shown unstable a w,~ value just as we can visualize system l(B) l(C) in Fig. flow that separates (4) is increased loses its stability from and (the actual two of 3.25). Much more as of to of separatrices into basins of attraction points corresponding of a family space these the state space of any given dynamical attractors, we can think of the sets of bifurcation the parameter stable autonomous structurally Up to this point, we have only considered flows into different as dividing unstable systems system flows. trajectory. What happens when the parameters have been held fixed for the duration is governed state system as the in which trajectory is, systems particular time which one or more parameters think of such parameters the flow is a function the drastically Nonautonomous ones unless nonautonomous attractors, timescale a qualitative together from an understanding in which basins of attraction, of if the parameter its input varies the parameter the evolves ? A nonautonomous are allowed as inputs of the parameters, to the system. Because, in a nonautonomous these parameters systems, dynamical dynamical are allowed system that of any in in to vary in time: X = 9(x; u(t)). We can above. system (perhaps space). as described dynamical time in in parameter to vary is one is changing points to characterize (e.g., periodic) that we have described small than autonomous structure. above relative sometimes In the (e.g.. to the piece system inputs and the way etc.) apply only on timescales variations. However, of the behavior can one of a nonautonomous dynamics at constant by a flow which values cross bifurcation systems are much more difficult simple input has a particularly case, most of the concepts understanding of its autonomous in time. 3. A theoretical framework The qualitative theory of dynamical understanding of both the possible systems behaviors allows one of a dynamical to build up a global the system and R. D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (199-f) 173-215 181 the interaction in terms of elementary mathematical of those behaviors on external parameters I will use this formalism between even when the solutions dependence In have no closed-form expression for this section, agents and their environ- characterizing ments. Only the basic framework will be described here. Some sample applica- in Section 4, and Section 5 discusses the tions of the framework will be presented assumptions some of its broader for future work. This framework owes a great debt to implications and directions tradition has long taken on many of these same the perspective questions. [6] and Maturana and Varela [47,48]. that the cybernetic I have been particularly to sketch a theoretical autonomous influenced by the work of Ashby of the proposed and considers framework framework functions. 3.1. Agents and their environments to some dynamical its environment ti and 8, respectively. [6], I will model an agent and Following Ashby systems I will assume that both & and % have convergent dynamics, I will assume systems: X& = L&(X,; Up) and as two that & and g are In i, = Z&; Up). that is, the to infinity, but instead eventually dynamical continuous-time addition, values of their state variables do not diverge converge environment agent or part of the environment?) should not depend overly much on the exact nature of this division. Our first act the world into individual components whose as scientific observers is to partition and there are many different ways to do this. interactions we seek to understand, For example, to view an agent’s body as part of ti and sometimes as part of 8. that the division between an agent and its (e.g., is an artificial limb or a tool part of the framework limit set. Note is somewhat arbitrary it will sometimes be convenient and therefore theoretical our are in constant interaction. Formally, An agent and its environment this means dynamical systems. In order to couple systems, we can make some of the parameters of each system this coupling state variables to agent parameters to environmental parameters. that ti and 8 are coupled nonautonomous two dynamical functions of some of the state variables of the other. I will represent with a sensory function S from environmental and a motor function M from agent state variables S(X,~) corresponds motor outputs. Thus, we have the following (Fig. 2): to an agent’s sensory inputs, while Mfx,) corresponds to its (5) X.d = d(x<g; se, 1; u.$) 1 r, =qx,;M(x,v,);u;) > where ui and u; represent any remaining parameters of & and 8 respectively that do not participate I will assume that this coupled agent- environment system also exhibits only convergent dynamics. in the coupling. Note that I am using the terms “sensory in a fairly broad sense here. S, for example, to represent all effects that 8 has is intended on .Y&, whether or not this influence occurs through what is normally thought of as that any such effect a sensor. This breadth of usage is justified by the observation input” and “motor output” 182 R. Ll. Beer I Artificial Intelhgencr 7.2 (10X05) 173-215 Fig. 2. An agent and its environment as coupled dynamical systems influence the subsequent can to represent all effects that ~4 has on 8, whether or not they occur through what is normally thought of as an effector. of ~4. Likewise, M is intended trajectory that role the feedback its environment feedback plays the fundamental via S. Likewise, the environment’s I cannot overemphasize in this in some way it receives effects on an agent itself. Thus, the flow of the if any coupling parameters cross bifurcation points in relationship. Any action that an agent takes affects its environment through M, which in turn affects the agent itself through from through S are fed back through M to in turn affect the environment each of these two dynamical systems is continuously deforming other (perhaps drastically its subsequent the receiving system’s parameter trajectory. Note that one dynamical system cannot in general completely specify the trajectory a dynamical state and laws, a second dynamical dynamical system can certainly bias the intrinsic “tendencies” of the first (or even in behavior cause qualitative one the trajectory of another dynamical dynamical system cannot in general “steer” to view an system along any desired path. It is therefore perhaps most accurate as mutual sources of perturbation, with each system agent and its environment for subsequent continuously system laws. By varying some of the parameters of these to which it is coupled. Rather, of another dynamical system specified by its own current space), and therefore the other’s potential follows a trajectory occur). However, if bifurcations influencing influencing interaction. changes Given this tight coupling between an agent and its environment, we can equally R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 183 the systems two coupled nonautonomous well view ti and 8 as a single autonomous dynamical system % whose state variables are the union of the state variables of d and ‘$5’ and whose dynamical laws are given by all of the internal (including S and M) among this larger set of state variables and their relations is intrinsically better than the other, and derivatives. Neither of these perspectives that has been said one could switch between in Section the between nonautonomous dynamical systems &? and 8 must be trajectories of the larger after transients have died out, autonomous the observed patterns of interaction between & and E must represent an attractor of %!. them as necessary. Given everything dynamical system 0%. Furthermore, trajectories interaction observed 2, any the in itself, but rather agent research, namely range of dynamical behavior We thus have the basis for a dynamical understanding of one of the central the idea that an agent’s themes of recent autonomous behavior arises not simply from within the agent its interaction with its environment. Due to the higher dimensionality of its state space, a dynamical system formed by coupling two other systems can generate a and richer properties to either subsystem alone. Therefore, resides only in the dynamics of the coupled system % and not in the individual dynamics of either Op or E alone. This suggests that we must learn to think of an agent as containing only a latent potential It is only when coupled with a suitable environment realized to engage in appropriate patterns of interaction. is actually of the coupled system can therefore not generally be attributed an agent’s behavior properly than either system could the agent’s behavior in that environment. that this potential individually, through through 3.2. Adaptive fit to the environments What constitutes an “appropriate” pattern of interaction between an agent and It is often said that the behavior of animals is amazingly well its environment? in which they must live. While, strictly speaking, adapted success, it is only animals whose evolution directly selects only for reproductive behavior “fits” the dynamical and statistical structure of their environments that survive long enough to reproduce. We would like the behavior of the autonomous in which agents that we design to be similarly well-adapted they must function. Thus, the notion of adaptive fit is crucial to understanding the relationship between an agent and its environment. But what does it mean for an agent to be adapted to its environment? Let us focus for the moment on animals, whose adaptive to the question What does it their survival. Then we can temporarily to the question What mean for an agent to be adaptively does it mean for an animal to survive? In order to answer this question, it will be useful to begin with a simple analogy to autonomous dynamical systems. As we have seen in Section 2, a dynamical law induces change on the state variables of a dynamical system. However, not all states are treated equally. While most states law, some will be changed reformulate fit to an environment? the action of the dynamical into other states through to the environments fitness is related 1x4 R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (lW5) 173-21.5 states will persist changes caused by system). change. Invariant indefinitely because the dynamical states “survive” to the law (i.e., an equilibrium point attractor of the in the same way that rocks do, by resisting invariant with respect they are in order that we design their environments the agents rocks, animals actively engage their existence. Similarly, we expect to stably Unlike to maintain accomplish particular tasks in their environments, not to sit immobile and ignore the world around them. In order to capture this more dynamic notion of survival, trajectories, which persist in a far more we can extend our analogy interesting way than do equilibrium points. In the case of a limit cycle, no single state is invariant with respect to the dynamical law. Rather, all of the states along law carries them a limit cycle have the property is itself to other invariant. Thus, the persistence of a limit cycle is achieved only by coordinating the effects of the dynamical a way that a closed trajectory law on all of the state variables of the system in such that the action of the dynamical forming a closed curve which states along limit cycle, to periodic is formed. the any Even such a dynamically maintained one which is constantly perturbed by its environment. to survive, as suggested by the limit cycle metaphor. Rather, living organism must maintain processes invariant as a limit cycle does not quite the notion of survival that we are after. It falls short in two ways. First, as in Section 3.1, an animal is not an autonomous dynamical system, but in to integrity of the network of [47,48] have it alive. Maturana this network of processes an autopoietic system.* If an animal’s autopoiesis capture explained rather a nonautonomous Second, an animal does not really have to maintain any particular trajectory order in order survive, biochemical termed is sufficiently disrupted, either as a result of its own internal dynamics or as a for, result of environmental then serves as a crucial constraint on its behavioral dynamics. We can visualize this constraint as a (perhaps very complex and time-varying) volume in an animal’s state space (Fig. 3; [6]). An animal is adaptively fit to an environment only so long as it maintains its trajectory within it receives from its environment. to exist. Thus, an animal’s autopoiesis that it cannot properly compensate this constraint volume despite the animal will cease the perturbations perturbations and Varela that keep that the In order to elaborate fit, the nature of the this basic account of adaptive constraint volume would need to be more completely characterized. For any real animal, this volume must obviously be very complicated, varying in time with its internal state. Indeed, the animal’s behavioral dynamics somewhat artificial, because any given and its constraint volume is fundamentally animal’s behavioral dynamics is clearly related to the particular way in which its autopoiesis for our purposes here, I take the existence of an agent (living or otherwise) is realized and this itself changes through evolution [47,48]. However, for the separation between ’ An autopoietic property interactions that (lit. self-producing) interactions between the that produced them. system is a network of component-producing the components produced generate processes with the very same network the of R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 185 fit. This simple example assumes that both the agent and its Fig. 3. An illustration of adaptive environment are one-dimensional dynamical systems. As the state of the environment xE moves up and down, the state of the agent x, must move back and forth accordingly so that the trajectory of the coupled system always remains within the constraint volume C. Here the two-dimensional coupled agent-environment system exhibits a limit cycle that satisfies the given constraint, but this is only one of an infinite number of possible agent-environment that satisfy C. trajectories granted and focus instead on the behavioral dynamics required existence. This of behavioral autopoietic given a priori. justifies and allows me to assume that the constraint volume to maintain dynamics focus constraints, the separation that from is process The adaptive fit of natural animals from an to their environments evolutionary involving reproduction with heritable variation and natural selection. When animals reproduce, mutations and sexual recombination of their in their design. Because the genetic material of genetic material those animals which do not survive long enough to reproduce is not passed on to descendants, designs are pruned away, while successful designs In terms of our framework, we can think of evolution as trying out proliferate. that, on average, are many different to reproduce. capable of satisfying their autopoietic constraints agent dynamics and retaining only those lead to variations inappropriate long enough results How might this notion of an autopoietic processes may be involved even robot may need constraint apply to artificial agents? an for a robot. For example, Homeostatic its energy and avoid any autonomous potentially damaging situations. However, since the agents that we design are not living organisms, their existence does not strictly depend upon autopoiesis. Instead, the success of an artificial agent is typically measured in terms of its to regularly replenish ability here, however, animals, that agent-environment largely agent’s to accomplish some desired this external it serves is, task in a given environment. the same on the admissible plays criterion as a constraint an intrinsic effects on its environment dynamics. The only real difference constraint on an animal’s own state, that are constrained role as autopoiesis For our purposes in living of the is trajectories is that, while autopoiesis it is usually by an external an artificial designer. Thus, we can immediately of as the that trajectory is, as long as their constraint @ on arbitrary (Fig. 3). I will say that an adaptive as long constraint. of the task for which might consider long as its interactions despite rearrangement the complicating a robot vacuum of furniture, factors generalize the dynamics the above notion of a coupled of adaptive agent-environment fit to an system fit exists between an agent and its environment the agent-environment results interaction the agent was designed. As a somewhat dynamics in an adequate fanciful this satisfies performance example, we as with its environment cleaner to be adaptively are such that in a typical home fit to its environment the floor remains children, (e.g., clean, pets, found and so on). 4. A concrete example The basic theoretical framework in nature. abstract more concrete, the two major problem problem while does what legged a simulated systems perspective the distinct the analysis it does sketched the general in the previous section is rather that I have proposed to make In order framework this section will show how it can be applied research, problems in autonomous agents speaking, to examples namely of each of the synthesis is the problem the synthesis and the unalysis problem. Loosely of constructing an agent that does what we want in a given environment, problem is the problem of understanding in a given environment. I will show how a walking behavior how a given agent for from the dynamical I will point out some of can be synthesized agent of this framework. Along and analyzed the way, advantages of this approach. 4.1. Synthesis of a walking agent A major design agents terms of our formally as follows: concern of much of the work on situated agents has been how that engage framework, in some desired we can state interaction with their environments. problem this synthesis to In somewhat more The Synthesis Problem. Given dynamics & and sensory on the coupled agent-environment an environment dynamics 8, find an agent and motor maps S and M such that a given constraint @ dynamics is satisfied. In order to illustrate the advantage of a dynamical systems perspective on the R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (199-T) 173-215 187 let us consider In terms of our framework, to body effecters, while the transformation agents, that will make a simulated the problem of designing a synthesis of autonomous insect-like agent walk (Fig. dynamical neural network the dynamics of the agent’s body is ‘8 and the 4; [ll]). that controls it is A?. M(x,) gives the transforma- dynamics of the neural network from body tion from neural activity inputs is given by S(X,). Here @ is a constraint on % only, sensors to neural than zero (where positive namely that the average velocity of the body be greater velocities correspond to backward motion). We will assume that S and M are given a priori in this example is to design a neural network controller whose dynamics are such and the problem that, when coupled that the design of locomotion is currently a problem of [15, 19,261. For a complete description of this work, as interest some practical well as additional examples, see [13]. to forward motion and negative velocities correspond they cause it to walk. Note to the agent’s body, for hexapod controllers robots The body operates as follows. There are six legs, each with a foot that may be either up or down. When its foot is down, a leg provides support to the body and to the body’s translation under Newtonian any forces that it generates contribute dynamics (the stance phase). When its foot is up, any forces generated by the leg cause it to swing (the swing phase). Each leg is controlled by three effecters: one governs the clockwise and the leg’s single joint. Each leg also possesses a counterclockwise single sensor that measures its angle relative to the body. The body can only move when it is stably supported, that is, when the polygon formed by the supporting feet contains the state of the foot and the other the body’s center of mass. two determine torques about The agent is controlled by a continuous-time recurrent neural network. Such form, an network of N such neurons is described by the following system of in Section 2. In their most general introduced networks were briefly interconnected equations: TJj; = -yi + 5 Wj,C7(Yj - Oj) + zi(t) i=l,2,. . . ,N (6) j=l Fig. 4. The body model of the simulated body. A supporting stable, (cross) of the body. foot the polygon i.e., when is denoted by a black formed by the supporting insect. The legs can swing about their single square. The body can only move when feet (dashed line) contains the joint with it is statically the center of mass 18X R.D. Beer I Artificial intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 rv,; represents is a sigmoidai (S-shaped) r is a time constant related the strength of the connection the matrix of connection weights interpreted as the mean membrane potential of the neuron, where y is sometimes C( 5) = (1 + eeC)-’ function which can be interpreted as its short-term average firing frequency, ej is a bias term associated with the cell’s to the passive properties of the cell firing threshold, membrane, from the jth to the ith input to the network (such as neuron, and Z(t) represents a time-varying external from a sensor). By restricting to be zero- diagonal symmetric, Hopfield [38] demonstrated that such networks could be used as associative memories, with each pattern stored as a different equilibrium point attractor of the network dynamics. When no such restriction is placed on the connection weights, these networks are capable of exhibiting a much wider range of dynamical behavior. This is the form in which they will be used here. Note that no claim is being made about the general applicability of this particular neural model. It was merely selected to illustrate the framework due to its simplicity and widespread use. leg of Each (Fig. 5(A)). Three of these neurons are motor neurons whose outputs network drive the three effecters of the leg, while the other two neurons are interneurons input from the whose role is unspecified. All five neurons in an leg’s angle sensor. Six copies of the single leg controller were combined loosely based upon the organization of the neural circuitry underlying architecture to form a full locomotion controller with 30 neurons (Fig. insect locomotion the number of free to reduce 5(B)). Symmetry parameters in this circuit to 50 (5 thresholds, 5 time constants, 25 leg controller weights, 5 sensor weights, 5 crossbody connection weights and 5 intersegmental connection weights). We wish to find settings of these 50 parameters dynamics of the network causes the agent to walk when coupled shown in Fig. 4. [ll] considerations were used such that the to the body the agent was controlled received a weighted fully-interconnected by a 5-neuron is that to realize have begun the constraint a number of researchers Regardless of the particular control mechanism used, the majority of current to manually construct a work on situated agents relies on a human designer that will cause the agent to engage in some desired interaction with its controller environment. However, that manual design may not be the best approach. What is difficult about the synthesis its to be satisfied may be very complex and problem specification may be very far removed from the actual agent dynamics required to satisfy it. For example, that the average velocity of the body be than zero does not immediately specify what signals need to be sent to the greater In addition, natural to satisfy this constraint. body’s eighteen effecters are rather complicated and somewhat unpredictable. Manual design environments and often fails because designers, into their contingencies to explore designs. For automated and other forms of learning (e.g., [9, 10, 23, 41, 461) or genetic algorithms (e.g., [17, that might arise, build too many unwarranted assumptions these techniques agent design, such as reinforcement reasons, a number of researchers the possible opportunities in trying to anticipate for autonomous the constraint have begun in order R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 189 Fig. 5. Network architecture of the between adjacent leg controllers. locomotion controller. (A) A leg controller. (B) Coupling (GA) to search A genetic algorithm 40, 65, 671). We used a genetic algorithm parameters the space of network for networks whose dynamics make the body shown in Fig. 4 walk.3 is loosely technique whose operation is a search [31,37]. The basic cycle of a genetic algorithm the 50 network is usually encoded as a binary string. An initially random population of each is then produced by to selected the previous for reproduction with a probability propor- based on natural evolution operates parameters) of such strings individual applying a set of genetic operators Individuals are selected generation. is maintained. At each is evaluated. A new generation as follows. The space the performance to be searched (in our case, of individuals individuals iteration, from is available by anonymous 3 We employed a public GA simulator known as GAucsd (version 1.1). At the time of this writing, the latest version of GAucsd directory. All network parameters were encoded in four bits, with time constants in the range [0.5, lo] and both thresholds and connection weights in the range [ - 16,161. The crossover rate was set to 0.6 rate was set to 0.0001. Population sizes of 500 were used and good locomotion and the mutation controllers to evolve. Full details of these experiments can be found in [13]. typically took on the order of 100 generations ftp from cs.ucsd.edu in the pub/GAucsd I90 K.D. Beer I Art(ficiul Intrlligertcr 72 (lW5) 17.3-21.5 to their tional are randomly two individuals nation tribution search fitness. The standard flipped) and crossover genetic operators are mutation (in which portions are exchanged). By iterating the processes of the genetic of selection, (in which bits strings of recombi- the dis- about accumulates information traveled by the agent in a fixed amount to be optimized.’ Note of time, we are not only demanding as possible. Because stable, information focuses subsequent requires a real-valued measure to be satisfied. In this case, the acceptable level of performance. that, by optimizing that of time distance insect insect can only make a network required find signals the the the GA must the three control the independent movements to satisfy of the maintained in order velocity of the body be greater think about than 0. these experiments. algorithm space. This the population search the and mutation, of fitness fruitful to guide in subspaces. its search, it that than each rather measure a genetic is statically a rigid constraint in a fixed amount it walk as quickly leg, but also properly the total forward distance progress when that not only appropriately into In order of performance constraint @ can be thought of as some minimum We used as the performance traveled walk, but forward dynamics to operate the six legs so that constraint There Abstractly, basis dynamics can by agent our neural algorithm quite useful because biology. out of which think of GAS as simply a technique the parameterized to walk when network network it is coupled as a simple model as a simple model of evolution. we can think of continuous-time it allows comparisons two different ways to build whatever is continuously the average architecture stability that are that we can generates coordinates for searching recurrent neural networks agent dynamics as simply a and we is required the family of flows defined the think of cause we can and the genetic for one whose dynamics to the body. More concretely, system of a nervous This second perspective to be made between can actually be and the model in not than However, perspective. to Both fitness measure we must be careful latter this involved considerably more complicated just one example, while we have externally GA, no such external exists an animal’s evolving, significantly rather extrinsic in a fixed, a priori that can possibly We evolved than being externally intrinsic environment the relationship extrinsic in a way that eleven different includes many other of a given behavior is something time. Fitness locomotion fashion, intrinsic evolve fitness fitness over and intrinsic specified. The significance is that, by favoring lose sight of the many and systems simplifications evolution nervous are these simple models would suggest. To take the a notion because evolution. imposed in natural of fitness on Indeed, that are simultaneously animals to reproductive success may change to natural environments between of this difference over others behaviors the range of behaviors functions particular limit fitness does not. controllers in all. Though the specific ‘Because GAucsd measure, distance the actual measure and the actual distance is formulated to minimize an error measure used was the square of the difference rather between than maximize the maximum a fitness attainable covered in a given length of time. R. D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 191 them have the property in these eleven networks, parameter values found by the GA were quite different the dynamics of all of the insect-like body shown in Fig. 4, they cause it to walk in such a way that stability is continuously maintained. The behavior of a typical controller is shown in Fig. 6(A). All of these controllers generate a pattern of leg movements known as the in which the front and back legs on each side of the body swing in tripod gait, unison with the middle leg on the opposite side. The tripod gait is ubiquitous among fast-walking that, when coupled insects [32]. to they passed As the networks evolved, through several more or less distinct stages. Very early on, agents appeared that put down all six feet and pushed until they fell. These agents thus exhibit roughly the proper phasing of the three signals controlling each leg, but lack the ability to recover a leg after a stance phase as legs. In the next well as the ability to coordinate stage, agents evolved swing their legs in an uncoordi- nated fashion. Such agents made forward progress, but they fell quite often. Finally, agents utilizing statically stable gaits began to appear, but their coordina- slowly tion was still suboptimal. improved. the efficiency of locomotion the motions of the different the ability to rhythmically Subsequently, During these experiments, we discovered that the nature of the environment in B R3- R2 Rl L3 L2 Ll - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Fig. 6. Behavior of a typical mixed locomotion controller with (A) and without (B) its sensors. Black bars represent the swing phase of a leg and the space between bars represents a stance phase. The legs are labeled L for the left and R for right and numbered from 1 to 3 starting at the front of the agent. is higher, the swings of the three legs in each tripod are more tightly Note that the stepping frequency coordinated and the velocity varies less when the sensors are intact (A). However, this controller can generate a reasonably good tripod gait even in the complete absence of any sensory feedback from the body (B). 192 R.D. Beer I Artificial intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 controllers were evolved had a major In particular, impact on their the locomotion which the relative contributions of & and 8 to the functional organization. generation of a walking pattern varied according to the dependability of sensory feedback during evolution. Three different classes of locomotion controllers were found: (1) If sensors were enabled during the GA search, (5 trials). A reflexive controller then reflexive patterns generators always evolved is one which depends upon sensory feedback for its operation. If the sensors are later phasing of motor exhibit controllers reflexive removed, outputs, and some cannot even oscillate in isolation. A reflexive controller is therefore not robust to sensor loss. Reflexive controllers take advantage of the fact that there is no point putting into the agent any dynamics that the already appear coupled agent-environment to be in the environment. All that matters system satisfy the given constraint. inappropriate is that (2) If the sensors were disabled during (4 trials). Even the GA search, then no access is to 8. In this case, so-called centralpattern generators (CPGs; [25]) individual neurons are not the rhythmic control signals is its for walking. The drawback of a CPG It can make no use of sensory its output to fine-tune is capable of generating feedback a CPG is that though the provided always evolved oscillatory, required stereotyped. operation. (3) Finally, if the presence of sensors was unreliable during the GA search then mixed ( i.e., sensors were sometimes available and sometimes not), pattern generators evolved (2 trials). A mixed locomotion controller is one that works better with its sensors intact, but is quite capable of generating the basic motor pattern required for walking even without its sensors (Fig. 6). Though mixed controllers they are are robust capable of using sensory feedback their performance when it is available. Such mixed organizations are the most typical among biological pattern generators. to sensory damage, to improve I formulated In this section, that utilized a bifurcation through a space of dynamical systems for those that, when coupled the problem of designing a walking agent as a search to a given body, maximize the forward distance that the body travels in a fixed amount of time. This same general approach has also been used to evolve a variety of chemotactic agents that were capable of using chemical signals to find their way to a patch of food 1131. The most notable result from these chemotaxis experiments were agents to switch between distinct strategies depending upon the intensity of the chemical signal the food patch). (which Furthermore, I have demonstrated the environment (i.e., sensor dependability) puts selective pressure on the develop- functional organizations. This ability to ment of controllers with very different tailor agent dynamics to fit the dynamical and statistical structure of automatically a given environment agent design techniques. the agent’s distance how manipulating is a significant advantage of automated in their network dynamics turn depended characteristics upon from in of R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 193 4.2. Analysis of a walking agent Given that some agent already exists, we might like to explain its behavior given environment. This is in fact the major problem faced by Neuroethologists, who seek to explain an animal’s observed behavior its body and its environment. analysis problem somewhat more formally as follows: in terms of its nervous system, this In terms of our framework, we can state in a The Analysis Problem. Given an environment dynamics 8, an agent dynamics &, and sensory and motor maps S and M, explain how the observed behavior M(x&) of the agent is generated. In order to illustrate the utility of a dynamical systems perspective on the the operation of the locomotion controllers described analysis of autonomous agents, we would like to understand evolved in the previous section. Unfortunately, a dynamical analysis of these 30 neuron networks would be far too complicated in a set of closely related experi- for our illustrative purposes here. However, insects [13]. Note ments, we also evolved five-neuron controllers for single-legged the that, for the purposes of evolving single leg controllers, we had to modify its single foot insect could move whenever stability criteria so that a single-legged was down. Except for the lack of an interleg coordination problem to be solved, in the previous these experiments were in every way analogous to those described section. These leg controllers passed through similar evolutionary stages and we also found reflexive, central and mixed pattern generators depending upon the conditions under which they were evolved. Fig. 7 shows the activity of a mixed leg controller with and without these five-neuron networks are much more amenable to a dynamical analysis, we will focus on them here. For additional information on this analysis, see [12,29]. its sensors. Because 4.2.1. Analysis of a central pattern generator they have no sensory input, central pattern generators are autonomous systems. For this reason, CPGs are in some sense the simplest to understand. Because leg dynamical controllers the dynamics of the neural In the case of a CPG, network simply exhibits a limit cycle whose motor space projection M(x~) causes the insect’s single leg to rhythmically stance and swing in a fashion appropriate to walking. The three-dimensional motor space projection of the five-dimensional limit cycle exhibited by one CPG is shown in Fig. 8. This limit cycle repeatedly takes the state of the system through the regions in motor space associated with stance phase (upper left-hand corner) and swing phase (lower right-hand corner). is Since a limit cycle is a primitive concept really nothing more to be said at this level of discussion about the operation of a CPG (though there is of course much more that might be said about the way in which this limit cycle is realized in dynamical systems theory, in this particular circuit). there R.D. Beer i Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 shows the forward of a typical mixed velocity of the body, the output of the and each stance phase and Fig. 7. Activity plots swing motor neurons value during phase and falls. The top plot also shows leg was initialized begin). Note without However, effectively wasting Interneuron than when its sensor, a step, because to play a much (A) A appears it is present at 95% of its full backward (A), this controller that, with its sensor larger intact then drops leg controller with (A) and without the output two interneurons. to zero when position this controller (i.e., near inappropriately (B) its sensor. Each group of lifts its single of the foot, backward The velocity insect the In both groups of plots, swing and forward ramps up to a maximum leg each swing the the point where a swing phase should begins a swing phase. phase, a stance that (B) also is absent attempts leg’s angular position. Note to generate immediately the sensor almost it has no access to the role in the walking pattern when the output of the leg angle sensor. R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 195 , , , /’ , -_ -_ 16’ -_ ---__ / , / , -a , ’ I , I I I I I I I I I I I 0.5. Foot I 0 ‘J / / -. -_ / I / / / Fig. 8. A motor space projection of the five-dimensional limit cycle generated by a typical central pattern generator. The output of the foot, backward swing (BS) and forward swing (FS) motor neurons are plotted. Note that the foot is considered to be down when the output of the foot motor is above 0.5 and up otherwise. A stance phase (foot and backward swing motor neurons neuron to a region near the back, upper left-hand active, forward swing motor neuron inactive) corresponds corner of the state space, while a swing phase (forward swing motor neuron active, foot and backward swing motor neurons inactive) corresponds to a region near the front, lower right-hand corner of the state space. 4.2.2. Analysis of Q reflexive pattern generator dynamical systems. When coupled (Fig. 9). However, we already know Due to the presence of a sensory feedback signal, reflexive leg controllers are to the body, the motor space nonautonomous limit projection of the dynamics of a reflexive controller also exhibits a suitable do not cycle produce appropriate rhythmic output when their sensory input is removed. Unlike a CPG, the limit cycle of a reflexive leg controller arises only when it is coupled to the body. Technically, projection of a higher this limit cycle is a three-dimensional system 021. How does the dimensional interaction between a reflexive controller’s autonomous dynamics and the sensory feedback trajectory of the coupled agent-environment that it receives from the body produce reflexive controllers that limit cycle? the observed is to think of a reflexive controller this question One way to approach from the is flowing it receives state as an by the sensory input autonomous dynamical system whose flow is parameterized the that network’s in whose basin it finds itself. However, because the angle of the leg is constantly changing, the structure of the flow is changing also, perhaps even undergoing bifurcations. We can network’s the instantaneous phase portrait of the autonomous network dynamics visualize to any given leg angle. We can also visualize the network’s state corresponding in the limit and the trajectory leg’s angle sensor. At any given point toward that it is instantaneously following at any point the attractor in time, 196 K.D. RWI. i Artificial Inielligerrw 72 (lYY_5) 173-21.5 state generally never the phase portrait together these completely continuously instantaneous in time, we can build up a picture of the dynamics points trajectories the system because by piecing cycle. Of course, instantaneous leg moves. However, different limit cycle observed when a reflexive the once depends is following, will in general an analysis in stance phase. While only on the leg angle), leg actually through passes be different. reflexive controller is coupled any given angle twice; once the phase portrait is the same the system’s state, and hence pictures underlying to the body. Note traverses changes these as the at many the that in swing phase and it that it in each case (since the trajectory of by The points toward of one controller controller controller autonomous the outputs is presented is simplified to the body it is coupled this reflexive the dynamics is established, have passed, cycle. At (l), this particular point attractor the equilibrium the limit cycle limit cycle that the instantaneous three-dimensional. the become in the swing/stance of its two interneurons constant. of this network is shown at the center of Fig. 9. Surrounding Such visualization transients other words, once essentially when central plot are smaller plots showing at different the network been put down and a stance phase begun. At flowing state space. The position foot and backward is inactive neuron of motor pattern applying a force angle and thus the output of the leg angle sensor. As the leg continues (2), passes replaced state attractor neurons phase). of this attractor swing motor neurons (i.e., neuron a stance phase). Due that it to move in Fig. 9. The that once fact In are exhibits this of dynamics the foot has just is corner of the in which the swing motor this is the leg to stance at leg the and is of the this of swing motor a swing (i.e., the network’s left-hand to a situation the forward (2) to (3), however, equilibrium foot and backward is active point. As disappears corner to the dynamics foot the activity means that causes corresponds are active and this equilibrium point near point suddenly lower this point, in the upper corresponds are inactive the the system swing motor neuron state has essentially state. The position and changing that now begins the equilibrium of the body, to the body the forward the system by another to a state to attract right-hand in which is down forward, reached space from state and the the leg The system state now begins to flow toward the output of the foot motor neuron the foot is lifted, actually (0.5) and the equilibrium and reappears. the output from (4) to (5), and (4), of the foot leg passes corner of the state space disappears the upper attractor activation beginning the coupled attracted corner (6) until for two equilibrium left-hand through the by the We can now explain by observing generator points. threshold a new stance phase. Thus we can see how system foot at (1) and network/body arises the (3). Between (3) this new attractor falls below beginning point attractor the activation threshold a swing phase. As the in the lower right-hand the earlier The network of the foot motor neuron equilibrium state now moves point attractor in this the is once again put down, in limit cycle observed toward goes above foot the as the network’s state is alternately reason the that, when that this controller its sensor is removed, is a reflexive the autonomous pattern R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 197 1 Foot reflexive (FS) motor pattern neurons The output The is shown at the center. Surrounding generator. are plotted. of the network at different points point attractor, trajectory that the gray point denotes follow the system would three plots the bottom roughly three plots correspond roughly when limit cycle generated in the step cycle. of the foot, backward swing this this central plot are plots of the In each case, system to (2) (4), (1) and (6), (2) and (5), and the instantaneous if the leg angle were (l), middle to the beginning correspond to the beginning (5) and end (6) of a swing phase. Vertical columns of plots leg angle and it is following differs between (i.e., therefore state and therefore to approximately the trajectory the same the same phase portrait, the upper and lower and swing autonomous of a typical to the body forward is coupled dynamics an equilibrium Fig. 9. Operation (BS) and controller instantaneous the solid point denotes state, remain top and end (3) of a stance phase, while middle (3) and (4)) correspond though plots of each column. the gray at its present angle. The line shows the system the 19x R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 the removal of a sensor by setting is governed by an equilibrium point. By convention, a dynamics of this controller to the long axis of the body is assigned a leg angle of 0. leg that is perpendicular to 0, the Since we modeled autonomous dynamics exhibited when the sensor is removed to that exhibited when the leg is fixed in a horizontal position (i.e., plots (2) and (5) in Fig. 9). Thus, the equilibrium point attractor in the upper left-hand corner of the state space and remain there, causing the leg to go into a permanent the system state will flow toward stance phase. if the sensor is removed, is identical its output this limit cycle disappears, in Fig. 10, which shows a sequence of bifurcations The switch between equilibrium points that occurs between (2) and (3) in Fig. 9, and again between (4) and (5), appears to be essential for the operation of this reflexive controller. How is this switch actually accomplished? This question is answered that occur in the autonomous dynamics of this network as the leg moves from an angle of about 23 degrees past horizontal to 16 degrees past horizontal during swing phase (between plots (4) and (5) in Fig. 9). The sequence begins with a single equilibrium point attractor at the bottom of the state space (1). At (2), a second equilibrium point attractor appears at the top. Note that, during swing phase, the system state is still in the basin of attraction of the lower attractor at this point. At (3), the lower into a limit cycle, which then begins to expand (4). equilibrium point bifurcates Eventually, leaving behind only a single equilibrium point at (5). Now the system state is attracted by this upper equilibrium point. This sequence of bifurcations is reversed during stance phase. A complete bifurcation diagram for this network can be found in [12]. take place in such a narrow the system state never really “sees” the intermediate the limit cycle that briefly appears plays no functional Because (approximately attractors. For example, role whatsoever in the network’s dynamics because the system state never has a chance to get near it, let alone go around it. During the normal operation of this controller, steps, during which the system state moves only an average Euclidean distance of 0.025 in the state space. However, is to alternately two equilibrium the network’s phase portrait between points that are crucial to its operation. This particular sequence of bifurcations unique to this controller, and was not observed were analyzed. this bifurcation sequence occurs in about 10 integration the net effect of this sequence of bifurcations these bifurcations 7 degrees), in any of the other controllers range of leg angles is that switch the it, via a series of intermediate bifurcations, From this dynamical analysis we can summarize the nature of the interaction the operation of this reflexive controller. The between & and 8 that underlies by S, is such that ‘8 can autonomous dynamics of &, and its parameterization deform two kinds of flows. In one of these flows, there is a single fixed-point attractor near the upper left-hand corner of the state space, while in the other there is a single fixed-point the lower right-hand corner. The nature of 8, and its parame- attractor near terization by M, is such that, when the network state is in the neighborhood of the the state of the body is changing in such a way that S upper the will cause the lower right-hand attractor in J& Likewise, when left-hand attractor, into essentially to appear R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 199 1 :’ 1 r: :’ ;r-__ : I I ---__ --__ ,-: /’ ; ’ f I’ /’ --J I r- -._ __ --._ --._ 0. 1 k : I ,' I, I I-- --.- -, I' 0. I' ,' . 0 0 1 0.5 4 0.5 3 2 x’ .’ 1 -_;’ --._ .r-__ I .’ I I I --•-_ --__ -._a r-__ --f ,’ ,’ ,’ --a ‘I 8’ 0. 0 0 \/_ . 0. -- 1 ---I I-- -- --_J /' /' I' ' I 1,1' 1 : : : I: Fig. 10. A sequence of bifurcations underlying the operation of the reflexive pattern generator shown in Fig. 9. Only attractors are shown. During swing phase (between plots (4) and (5) in Fig. 9) the autonomous dynamics of the network undergoes the sequence of bifurcations shown here. During stance phase (between plots (2) and (3) in Fig. 9), this sequence of bifurcations is reversed. 200 K.D Beer I’ Arrijiciul lnrelligcwce 72 (199.5) 17-J-21.5 network the body to appear the observed essential is in the neighborhood state is changing in ~2. This reciprocal in such a way that S will cause relationship rhythmic walking pattern. Therefore, and deeply intertwined roles in the operation of the lower right-hand attractor, the upper left-hand the state of attractor between & and 8 is what gives rise to both & and 8 play absolutely controller. of this reflexive that show plot are smaller plots limit cycle. As for this of the coupled network/body along points the dynamics the instantaneous the reflexive controller, system by piecing we can together of the reflexive the analysis of a mixed controller. five-dimensional, However, leg controller because we only plot The of this system’s trajectories. limit cycle it is coupled is shown from to the body different is somewhat above, they both the leg walk. Surrounding autonomous exhibit to make discussed dynamics in a the the limit in the the one the this 4.2.3. Analysis of a mixed pattern generator As shown in Fig. 11, we can approach controller this controller similar of to our analysis this circuit motor the shape of this reflexive the is fundamentally space projection exhibits when fashion dynamics three-dimensional cycle that center. While generated by proper phasing of motor outputs necessary central at various understand these autonomous equilibrium coupled as the deforming of its sensor sensory input the leg walk. this is because is set to 0 (see plots In the absence changes, limit cycle. The reason that the autonomous dynamics points through most of limit cycle rather of this mixed to the body. instantaneous leg angle snapshots. than and However, unlike the controller exhibits the cycle. When reflexive limit cycles the mixed controller, rather controller this limit cycle is continuously state the system deformed is constantly this mixed controller as shown attracted can tolerate limit cycle that it generates when (2) and (5) in Fig. 11) is appropriate the than is in Fig. 11 by this the loss the to make follow of any sensory input, the limit cycle shown is capable of autonomously feedback to explore is the sensory ? In order the system state would in the center of Fig. 11. generating it receives an appropriate from the body this question, we examined sensory driven with sinusoidal responds when it is artificially if any in its operation is higher or lower than normal. Under these conditions, the motor output pattern that generates speeds up or (Fig. 12). The sensory produced by the controller the controller signal is thus capable of entraining itself. Despite the fact that the this range of of the interneurons changes considerably throughout the amplitude, for walking. Within the motor pattern shape a significant and phasing of the motor about outputs its normal range remains 1: 1 phase-locked with the sensory at higher or lower driving of biological locust [64]. feature underlying receptors is a common generator of wing stretch ratios of phase-locking feedback the pattern flight other by sensory For example, by rhythmic stimulation Since a mixed controller role frequency playing the controller limit cycle, what actually how input whose that we found slows down accordingly the intrinsic oscillation activity pattern operating remains operating signal. We have observed frequencies. pattern can be entrained appropriate frequency, frequencies, Entrainment generators. This entrainment has an interesting functional consequence. Suppose that the R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (199-f) 173-215 201 Foot 6 Fig. 11. Motor space projection of the operation of a typical mixed pattern generator. The layout of this figure is the same as for Fig. 9. legs. Thus, in time relative the sensory feedback legs of the agent were to grow during its “life”. For a given amount of applied longer stancing legs will take more time to swing through a given angle torque, leg will be than shorter signal from a longer spread out the mixed leg. Since that it receives from the body, the controller to slow down its sensory feedback motor output pattern accordingly. Adapting is a general problem development or following peripheral damage. Note, however, that pattern generators have to deal with, for example from a longer leg will cause the leg controller is entrained by the sensory feedback their output to a changing periphery to that of a normal that this adaptation length in 202 K.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (199S) 17.3-215 Fig. 12. Entrainment When speeds up accordingly. the driving of the mixed pattern is lower frequency generator shown (A) or higher (B) than normal, in Fig. 11 by sinusoidal the motor pattern sensory input. slows down or R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 203 a separate itself, does not come about through any structural change to the neural network the network nor does it require it arises as a natural consequence of the dynamics of the parameters. Rather, and its coupling with the body. This is a kind of functional mixed controller thought of as learning. plasticity which is quite different However, the ability of an insect to immediately adjust its gait following the loss of a leg [32]). there are many examples of such plasticity in biology (for instance, from what is normally to modify algorithm learning The dynamical sophistication of this mixed leg controller With only five neurons (three of which are motor neurons), generate leg movements necessary the basic swing/stance advantage of sensory feedback only a slight degradation morphological nism. The controller by hand is probably of anyone designing rather in performance; likelihood low. and changes in the body without requiring a separate if it is available but can tolerate (3) adapt is truly remarkable. this controller can (1) for walking; (2) take its absence with its operation to learning mecha- leg such a flexible and compact 4.2.4. Conclusion controllers to loss of sensory of their autonomous This section has illustrated how some of the tools of dynamical systems theory to the analysis of an agent interacting with its environment. For can be applied are example, we have been able to explain why some locomotion feedback and others are not in terms of the appro- robust priateness or inappropriateness to the walking task. Furthermore, we have been able to gain significant insight into the specific the network dynamics and the body that gave nature of the interaction between in each of the three controllers analyzed. For example, rise to a walking pattern while the reflexive controllers make use of the body dynamics in a fundamental way in the generation of the limit cycle necessary capable of generating appropriate mixed controllers use rhythmic sensory feedback cycles. Along feedback, periphery. the CPGs are and the limit it is entrained by sensory to a changing limit cycles completely autonomously to fine-tune autonomous the way, we discovered the mixed controller its motor output that, because for walking, can adapt dynamics indistinguishable walking behavior when coupled What general conclusions can we draw from this analysis? One is struck by the variety of agent dynamics which evolved. Not only are the actual network parameters of each controller different, but the underlying dynamics vary widely. Yet they all lead to virtually to lesion studies of these control- the body under normal conditions. Furthermore, is dynamically lers (not described here) have demonstrated distributed, to to assign specific functional the only thing that can be said about all of these individual they are systems controllers embedded in which they this is all that they were selected for in evolved. in that it is simply inappropriate the first place. We are thus led to conclude the coupled agent-environment to do under them usually making interneurons. About is that do what we asked Indeed, as in natural evolution, that their operation the conditions it impossible in which roles 204 R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 7.2 (1995) 173-215 general to attempt to impose our functional preconceptions on the organization of evolved systems. 5. Discussion for framework agents. The framework focuses on the problem of generating In this paper, I have attempted theoretical to use the language of dynamical systems theory the design and analysis of to sketch a general the autonomous time as both an agent’s internal state and appropriate behavior at the appropriate continuously change. The two key ideas of this frame- its external environment as two work are (1) that an agent and its environment must be understood for the is jointly responsible coupled dynamical systems whose mutual interaction agent’s behavior and (2) that the adaptive fit between an agent and its environ- in terms of the satisfaction of a given constraint on the ment can be characterized trajectories of the coupled agent-environment system. I have particularly empha- is, strictly speaking, a property of the coupled sized that an agent’s behavior agent-environment to either the agent or environment system only and cannot in general be attributed individually. they represent to either continuous-time for a six-legged agent was used to illustrate A concrete application of these ideas to the synthesis and analysis of a walking the framework. While I feel recurrent neural networks or at least one way in which agent dynamics system can be to agent design allows the agent’s to the particular dynamical and statistical structure of robust and compact control- that, despite the fact that they often exhibit no the operation of these evolved systems can be behavior no particular commitment genetic algorithms, satisfying a given constraint on the coupled agent-environment designed. Such an “evolutionary” organization its environment lers. I have also demonstrated clean functional organization, understood this perspective interaction between walking behavior from the perspective of interacting dynamical systems. Furthermore, insight the specific nature of the that gives rise to the observed and leads to remarkably adaptive, the agent and its environment in the various controllers. can provide significant to be tailored approach into 5.1. Related work There a growing is currently impact in such fields as neuroscience, in dynamical explanations in the be- interest idea dates back at least to cybernetics havioral and brain sciences. The central [6,63]. More recently, concepts from dynamical systems theory have been making cognitive science and mobile a substantial robotics. Within neuroscience, to single (e.g., [55]), small circuits (e.g., [62]) and complete brain systems (e.g., neurons the model of olfactory cortex formulated by Skarda and Freeman [58], in which a chaotic attractor plays a central role). The concepts of dynamical systems are also control of beginning dynamical analyses have been applied to play a major in understanding the biological role R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 205 [57]). Connectionism (e.g., [60] (though has made dynamics one of its founding it is not clear that the full implications of this principle [36]) and has, for example, movement principles have yet been appreciated begun to propose theories of language in its terms [27,53]. Both van Gelder [61] in and Giunti [30] have begun to formulate a dynamical conception of cognition cognitive science more generally. Finally, Smithers [59] has recently argued for a role for dynamical ideas in mobile robot research. in connectionist research as two in order framework for it to engage Within the autonomous agents literature, related is perhaps most closely [56]. He models an agent and the theoretical that I have to Rosenschein’s work on situated proposed interacting its environment automata that knowledge need not be explicitly encoded automata and he has emphasized within an agent interactions with its environment. He has used concepts from automata and formal language theory to characterize this how concepts from perspective dynamical the behavior of such systems. On the other hand, while systems, especially emphasizing continuous Rosenschein’s major concern has been how propositional content can be assigned between an agent’s internal states and the states of its environ- to correlations ment, my interest the appropriate behavior at the time. appropriate to arbitrary dynamical systems and demonstrated systems In a sense, I have generalized the behavior of such systems. is in how an agent can generate theory can be used in sophisticated to characterize 5.2. Assumptions and extensions This paper has focused on continuous, low- and In dimensional dynamical systems as models for agents and their environments. this section, their impact on the framework, and a number of ways in which they might be relaxed. the motivation behind these assumptions, I briefly consider deterministic, convergent 5.2.1. Continuity dynamics continuous The emphasis on continuous state spaces and (i.e., time) in this paper is motivated by the fact that the dynamics of both in nature. For (a seemingly discrete the current flows that underlie action potentials are continuous quantities. it has long been known that many nerve cells do not produce action [52]. Likewise, the (e.g., decision making) it is my belief that in the rich dynamical continuous nervous systems and the macroscopic physical world are continuous though many nerve cells fire action potentials example, event), Furthermore, potentials but instead communicate using graded potentials more discrete behavioral phenomena must eventually be explained the versatility and robustness of animal behavior possibilities of continuous terms. In addition, that we observe in continuous state spaces. resides it should be noted However, deterministically of the concepts we have used hold in discrete-time hold in systems defined on discrete state spaces. For example, that any system with finite state which evolves can be described using the concepts of dynamical systems. Most systems as well, and many also table the transition 206 R.D. Rwr ! Artificial Intelligencc~ 72 (1995) 173-215 exhibit, of a finite state machine metric on this state space can equilibrium ous continuity still apply. Thus but point, assumption defines limits concepts a flow on a discrete behavior state, the dynamical initial as state space. The that a finite state machine attractor, flow, lack of a trajectory, such limit cycle, basin of attraction, autonomous framework may still be useful and nonautonom- even if the the present should turn out to be inappropriate. in this paper is purely the common assumption in science deterministic in that the framework sketched from derives physical world is in principle completely the dynamical laws that govern determined by a knowledge its evolution. However, we often unpredictable. What real environments, real sensors, etc. are somewhat is that, because we have only laws, we are forced incomplete knowledge to describe of a its In other words, regardless of whether the macroscopic physical in principle, we must it as stochastic in to use stochastic models or not sometimes treat 5.2.2. Determinism The theoretical nature. This determinism macroscopic of its state and say that this usually means system’s state and behavior. world practice. is deterministic It should be noted that continuous-time recurrent neural networks in the face of unpredictable robust controllers feedback, can often and preliminary the sensory feedback tolerate studies signal sign of being locomotion sensory to noise on robustness theoretical of these framework controllers, the question itself might be applied to unpredictable as systems. contingencies. show every The or the loss of environmental the loss of an interneuron indicate that as well. However, naturally arises they are extremely regardless robust the of the to how As I see it, there are two possibilities, of unpredictability systems can exhibit dynamics in practice or stochastic model namical but unpredictable been made analysis of chaotic dynamics modeled with chaotic dynamics, on extending (so-called the qualitative depending is adopted. that is completely chaotic dynamics). upon whether Recall a deterministic that nonlinear dy- deterministic Significant in principle progress has the systems to of a given system can be theory of dynamical [66]. If the unpredictability techniques then such can be applied. Otherwise, In [7]). Typical concerns tability. example, how some probability time and determining techniques such direction we must deal with a fundamentally stochastic model of unpredic- this case, we must consider stochastic in stochastic dynamical dynamical systems systems are understanding (see, for function density the asymptotic over the states of the system evolves with of The application form of this distribution. to autonomous agent problems is clearly an important research for the future development of the framework. 5.2.3. Convergence In this paper, are convergent, limit sets divergent rather regions I have assumed that that both is, the values of their state variables the agent and environment dynamics than diverging is acceptable to infinity. In fact, even as long as the dynamics eventually a flow of interaction converge that contains to between the R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 207 agent and environment never enters such a region. Divergent dynamical systems limitations and satura- are a mathematical tion effects, no real physical system is truly divergent. Thus, the assumption of convergent dynamics abstraction anyway. Due to resource is, I think, a fairly reasonable one. However, this convergence it is important not to confuse the framework applies. Indeed, never settle on an autonomous assumption with the limit sets claim that the dynamics of agents and environments must settle onto the dynamics of the reflexive and mixed before instead are pattern generators their flow is constantly perturbed by the sensory always in a transient because feedback the dynamics of the coupled agent- system in these examples does eventually settle into a limit cycle, but environment even this need not be the case in general. If either the environment or the agent contains dynamics on time scales that are long relative to the lifetime of the agent, then them will take place on an extended of interaction between receive. Of course, the entire trajectory transient. attractor, they that but transient, however, the framework described Even in the case of an extended in the agent and its this paper still applies. The dynamics of interaction between is still determined by the global structure of the flow of the coupled environment is itself largely determined by the types and locations of system and this structure in a system with multiple time scales, there may be a its limit sets. Furthermore, time short great deal of recurrence it is often possible the slower state scales. Under such conditions, constant parameters of the faster dynamics and variables as being approximately the attractors of this to study the slower state reduced system are not true attractors of the full system (because variables are in fact changing), that may show up repeatedly over sufficiently short time scales (cf. Agre and Chapman’s notion of routines [3]). to the system’s behavior over sufficiently they represent patterns of interaction the dynamics of this reduced system. Though to treat 5.2.4. Low dimensionality strongly on their relatively Our ability to visualize the dynamics of the leg controllers described in Section 4 depended low dimensionality. Clearly, we will often need to analyze systems whose dimensionality makes direct visualization of the flow impossible. In this case, we must find ways to simplify the dynamics complete or rely upon nonvisual techniques. One obvious approach (utilized in Section 4) is to visualize higher dimensional dynamics with a set of carefully selected lower dimensional find a series of that map the dynamics of a higher dimensional system coordinate system while preserving most of its global structure. For to a lower dimensional to reduce example, Hodgkin-Huxley model of action potential generation system that preserves not only the qualitative behavior of the original system, but most of its quantitative behavior as well [43]. projections. More generally, one can sometimes the four-dimensional to a two-dimensional such a technique has been used transformations A number of other by reducing either their dimensionality or complexity techniques are available for simplifying dynamical systems in some spatial or temporal 208 R.D. Beer / Artificial Intelligence 72 (lYY.5) 173-215 systems of Lyapunov region of interest (e.g., Poincare maps, center manifolds, normal forms, symbolic [66]). In addition, many of the analytical dynamics and the use of symmetries techniques limit sets, stability of dynamical analysis, computation etc.) do not require a global visualization of the flow. Finally, it should be pointed out that some progress has even been made on extending to the qualitative infinite-dimensional delay-differential techniques will undoubtedly need to be explored as larger systems are studied. those arising from sets of partial differential, and other theory of dynamical systems integro-differential (e.g., computing systems (e.g., [34]). These exponents, equations; theory and 5.3. Modularity and design and there in the is that Because its environment the only requirement on an agent’s dynamics system satisfy a given constraint, the coupled is a great deal of agent-environment the freedom both in how a desired dynamics of interaction the agent’s agent and leg dynamics. We saw examples of this freedom controllers where, despite the fact that both their individual dynamics and the nature of their interaction with the body vary widely, all of these leg controllers produce virtually to the body is a growing realization within neuro- under normal conditions. Likewise, science in even simpler animals are highly distributed and nonhierarchical and that traditional engineering principles may not apply to their design [4]. there the neural circuits mediating nontrivial behaviors indistinguishable walking behavior when coupled is divided between of in our analysis of the evolved internal organization that (rather decomposition to be solved, of the problem Because evolution only directly selects against agent dynamics that do not satisfy their constraint than selecting for some optimal design), evolution tends to produce designs that take full advantage of the available freedom. This is very different from engineered systems. can lead to designs whose organization When an engineer designs a complex system, he or she typically performs a in simpler hierarchical functions and interfaces. Such a modular subsystems with clean, well-defined decomposition and maintainable implementation, the part of the designer. Evolution, however, operates under no such constraints. Natural selection preserves those animals that, as a package, work and discards those that do not. Of course, this is not to say that evolved systems are completely unstructured. Certainly, evolved systems exhibit modularity and it is likely that to produce systems with the complexity of animals evolution would be unable without it. However, because the internal organization of an evolved system does of any designer, whatever modules do exist are not reflect the conceptualization under no requirement that we expect from an engineered is necessary and it also appeals to a certain aesthetic sense of parsimony on to exhibit the sort of clean functional organization to ensure a correct, resulting system. reliable One might argue that this “messiness” reflecting example, we might be tempted detail the blindness of evolution and not a fundamental part of the design. For to describe the leg controller dynamics as “really” is really just an implementation R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 209 of features versatile, is severely the “problem” are completely is not a predictive but highly effective, power of this summary the underlying dynamical a simple finite state machine but merely (and therefore two states to realize a that switches between it is important this negative assessment overlooks a crucial difference between these networks, explanation summary of their normal operation. The predictive just implementing labeled “swing phase” and “stance phase”. However, that this descriptive explanatory) limited by the fact that it fails to capture the system’s oper- ation. For example, to actually make the leg walk are not deducible from such a description. It also fails is capable of fine-tuning a walking pattern, or to capture how sensory feedback why some networks are robust to sensor loss while others are not. Yet these and other and succinctly explained by the qualitative dy- namical analysis summarized laws that actually govern the temporal patterns of motor neuron activations required in Figs. 8, 9, 10 and 11. The fact that evolution can produce such messy designs is typically viewed as a it is also a source of freedom the success. Designing an artificial tasks in an uncon- solved by for which traditional engineering methods together to cobble shortcoming. However, robust and compact designs. counterintuitive Furthermore, the task of an engineer and that of evolution. Engineers solve well-defined problems, that allow modular and it is the detailed a priori specifications of those problems to be designed and their parsimony or optimality solutions In to be evaluated. that any given contrast, evolution has no clear specification of the “problem” it would do little good animal should solve. Even if such a specification existed, since changes and relationship between behavior and reproductive agent capable of autonomously strained real-world environment evolution have been successful. While evolutionary designing autonomous standard genetic algorithm does not scale well with the size of the parameter space using the direct encoding of neural network parameters employed here. These scaling problems will need to be addressed before such techniques can be that end, many to applied encodings and many different variations of the basic genetic different parameter to autonomous algorithm have been proposed other search techniques, agent design needs to be explored. Where appropriate, should also be explored. techniques, such as simulated annealing and gradient When possible, biological data and symmetry reduce the Another directly, constructs to to be searched, as in the adjacent coupling of in Section 4.1. space of the agent’s dynamics that strategy but the parameter the agent’s dynamics (e.g., [35,50]). design shows great promise as a practical method agents, is much closer to the sort of “problem” evolving as the physical environment the design of more complicated (e.g., [16]) and their application is to search not the parameter space of a developmental than it is to the problems accomplishing open-ended the number of parameters in the full locomotion controller described itself is constantly it is well known species modifies the performance agents. Toward the coevolution of conspecifics for of the leg controllers considerations can be used and other process rather that Yet another approach to the scaling problem is to evolve a complex agent One possibility to independently and then be obtained task. Another possibility of a difficult problem, successively the controllers to solve is to decompose a complex task into a set by evolving evolve increase between solutions solutions is to evolve the coupling to these. A complete subnet- these to a simpler and Finally, the harder versions of the problem. agents of simulated search can only be carried out issues in transferring the problem complexity, involved instead robots for physical since evolutionary are nontrivial incrementally. subtasks dynamics of simpler solution can works on the original version then attempts introduce in simulation controllers to evolve additional re-evolve at present from simulated there to physical environments [21,40]. controllers problems, and 5.4. Internal state and representation Due to its emphasis on the unpredictable nature and real-time the real world, a great deal of recent work on autonomous the development immediate their present function autonomy agent no internal outputs. A reactive inputs it is constantly it maintains to motor of reactive situation. agents whose actions framework A purely because because reactive sensory pushed around from are completely is a degenerate state. Rather, by its environment. requirements of agents has focused on by determined case of the a true agent has no it is simply a dynamical of internal systems perspective state to an agent’s operation. Unlike on autonomous state can initiate behavior independently and organize its behavior in anticipation This ability relies upon the fact that, while is complicated and somewhat unpredictable, natural agents emphasizes agent, its immedi- configura- a reactive from of future it is true environments that a great deal of structure that a properly designed agent can depend exploit controllers [39]. As a simple exploit the structure example, consider the way of the body dynamics in to internal In contrast, the importance an agent with ate circumstances tions of its environment. the real world also exhibit and even actively upon which reflexive the achieve walking. importance Does of internal the framework The question: Much of the debate between the equation assumed tacitly nents using criticisms limitations using (e.g., t this question me briefly explain why I believe the [20,44]). B u are internal clearly deserves of representation of state-free The problem with equating state in the present imply a commitment framework raises an interesting to internal representation? proponents of internal and critics of situated agent state with representation, to argue the need for reactivity research has with propo- and critics systems to argue the need for representation a more detailed state and representation treatment the answer must be no. and that internal state than the same thing? Though I can give it here, let theoretical appropriate claim representations that a system’s and then becomes a tautological theoretical the of putationalism, instantiation [28,51,54], esis must be falsifiable, empirically tested and it must be possible that is, it must be formulated to be sufficiently that the test will come out negative. But clearly that is derives representation behavior computational from processes position. A scientific hypoth- com- its R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 211 all physical systems possess internal state on a variety of timescales. We would presumably hesitate in accepting, say, the temperature of the fuel-air mixture in a cylinder of an automobile engine as a representation If, on the other hand, we did admit such a storm as performing any computation. then computationalism would broad definition of representation and would therefore be rather become making no the processes theoretical underlying behavior. Similar problems exist with other commonsense notions of of the representation relationship between input and output). For a more detailed discussion of these issues, see [12]. and computation, than by demonstration true by definition interesting of anything, or a thunder- (e.g., correlation) and computation the nature of claim about systematicity (e.g., therefore [30,61]. There For this reason, be special cases of dynamical the mere possession of internal state (or correlation, systems must representation must require additional conditions above and etc.) and computa- beyond systems more tional generally form is a great deal of controversy of these extra conditions, but the details fortunately need not concern us here. What matters is that the framework’s emphasis on internal state, while allowing it to transcend imply the question of whether or not a commitment the operation of any the notion of representation of the internal investigation particular is thus, strictly organization of that particular agent’s dynamics. The framework speaking, agnostic about the theoretical and computation in the design and analysis of autonomous the limitations of purely reactive systems, does not necessarily agent must be settled by an empirical to internal representation. Rather, roles of representation about the particular for understanding is appropriate agents. 5.5. Conclusion This paper has largely been presenting an argument about language, namely the In language that we use to talk about autonomous agents and their environments. particular, my primary goal has been ideas emerging from recent work on autonomous agents (as well as work on the neural basis of animal behavior, this aspect here) can be though I have not emphasized naturally cast into the language of dynamical systems theory. that many of the to demonstrate One must never underestimate the power of language in shaping the way we languages provide the metaphors we use to the very phenomena we seek to understand. A computational invites us to think about representations think about the world. Our theoretical conceptualize language and their manipulation. Using this language, we become concerned with the structure of representations, where they are stored, how they are retrieved, what they mean, etc. From a computa- in an agent’s behavior become windows tional perspective, observed into its program. acts toward some end, tells us, it must be by virtue of possessing an internal then, computationalism perception that goal. From representation of the becomes a problem of reconstructing and external Taking action becomes a problem of constructing If, for example, an agent persistently a computational an accurate representation environment. perspective, regularities internal of 212 R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (199.5) 17.3-215 representations executing problem of modifying existing representations so on. of the actions to be performed. Learning becomes a and accumulating new ones. And the difficult This paper has only just begun exhibited by autonomous in developing for these and other phenomena to be done task of developing a dynamical language agents. A great deal of work remains into a full-fledged theory. for our understanding then specific dynamical accounts of sequential behavior, perception, learning, etc. will need to be developed and these accounts will need to be applied to specific agents, both natural and artificial. I strongly suspect that a dynamical perspective on these phenomena will significantly change the way we think about them. action, goal-oriented behavior, decision-making, is to succeed in providing a foundation If this framework of autonomous this framework agents, Ultimately, the position representations. like all work on embodied agents, the framework must face the fact form and reason with conceptual that people can deliberately that such intellectual capabilities are relatively While I have taken capacity for situated action (and recent elaborations of a far more fundamental are therefore not nearly so crucial as is usually assumed for even highly complex but nondeliberative eventually be explained. to such cognitive behavior as Will attempts of language computational for situated action? Or will the very way we think about such cognitive behavior, and the notions of representation that currently seek to underwrite it, also have to change in the process? to extend a dynamical perspective implementation responsible they must nevertheless the substrate and computation the dynamical processes on and abstract to require behavior), reasoning turn out top of Acknowledgments and Beth Preston for many useful discussions and for I would like to thank Phil Agre, Hillel Chiel, John Gallagher, Ken Loparo, Leslie Picardo, their comments on earlier drafts of this paper. I would also like to thank the reviewers, the Workshop as well as the attendees of their many helpful suggestions. The simulation and Agency, Interaction experiments in Section 4 were carried out in collaboration with John reviewed Gallagher. This work was supported by grant NOOO14-90-J-1545 from the Office of the Howard Hughes Naval Research. Additional through Medical Institute and the Cleveland Advanced Manufacturing Program the Center for Automation and Intelligent Systems Research. support was provided by on Computational of for Theories References [l] R.H. Abraham and CD. Shaw, Dynamics-The Geometry of Behavior (Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 2nd ed., 1992). R. D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (1995) 173-215 213 [2] P. Agre, Cambridge, MA The dynamic (1988). structure of everyday life, Technical Report 1085, MIT AI Lab., [3] P.E. Agre and D. Chapman, Pengi: an implementation of a theory of activity, in: Proceedings Seattle, WA (1987) 268-272. AAAI-87, [4] J.S. Altman [5] M.A. Arbib and J. Kien, Highlighting and J.-S. Liaw, Sensorimotor Aplysia’s networks, transformations Trends Neurosci. 13 (3) (1990) 81-82. robots, in the worlds of frogs and Artif. Intell. 12 (1995) 53-79. [6] W.R. Ashby, Design for a Brain (Wiley, New York, 2nd ed., 1960). [7] K.J. Astrom, Introduction to Stochastic Control Theory (Academic Press, New York, 1970). [S] D.H. Ballard, Animate vision, Artif. Intell. 48 (1991) 57-86. [9] A.G. Barto, S.J. Bradtke and S.P. Singh, Learning to act using real-time dynamic programming. Artif. Intell. 72 (1995) 81-138. [lo] K. Basye, T. Dean and L.P. Kaelbling, Learning dynamics: system identification for perceptually challenged agents, Artif. Zntell. 72 (1995) 139-171. [ll] R.D. Beer, (Academic Intelligence as Adaptive Behavior: An Experiment Press, San Diego, CA, 1990). and dynamical languages for autonomous [12] R.D. Beer, Computational and R. Port, eds., Mind as Motion (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, in Computational Neuroethology agents, to appear). in: T. van Gelder [13] R.D. Beer and J.C. Gallagher, Evolving dynamical neural networks for Adaptive behavior, Adaptive Behav. 1 (1992) 91-122. [14] R.D. Beer, R.E. Ritzmann and T. McKenna, eds., Biological Neural Networks in Invertebrate Neuroethology and Robotics (Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1993). [15] R.D. Beer, H.J. Chiel, R.D. Quinn, K.S. Espenschied and P. Larsson, A distributed neural network [16] R.K. Belew architecture for hexapod and L.B. Booker, robot locomotion, Neural Comput. 4 (3) (1992) 356-365. eds., Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Genetic Algorithms (Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1991). [17] L.B. Booker, 161-192. Classifier systems that learn internal world models, Mach. Learn. 3 (1988) [18] R.A. Brooks, A robust layered control system for a mobile robot, IEEE Trans. Rob. Aurom. 2 (1986) 14-23. [19] R.A. Brooks, A robot that walks: emergent behaviors from a carefully evolved network, Neural Comput. 1 (2) (1989) 253-262. [20] R.A. Brooks, [21] R.A. Brooks, Artificial Intelligence without life and representation, real robots, Artif. Intell. 47 (1991) 139-159. in: Toward a Practice of Autonomous Agents: Proceedings of the First European Conference of Artificial Life, Paris, France (1992) 3-10. [22] D. Chapman, [23] D. Chapman algorithm 726-731. Vision, Instruction and Action (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1991). and L.P. Kaelbling, Input generalization reinforcement in delayed and performance comparisons, in: Proceedings ZJCAZ-91, Sydney, Australia learning: an (1991) neuroethology: (241 D. Cliff, Computational in: From Animals to Animafs: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior, Paris, France [25] F. Delcomyn, [26] M. Donner, Real-Time Control of Walking (Birkhauser, [27] J.L. Elman, Distributed Science 210 (1980) 492-498. Neural basis of rhythmic a provisional manifesto, Boston, MA, 1987). and grammatical (1991) 29-39. representations, in animals, structure, networks recurrent behavior simple Mach. Learn. 7 (1991) 195-225. Press, Cambridge, MA, 1975). [28] J.A. Fodor, The Language of Thought (Harvard University of evolved [29] J.C. Gallagher controllers, eds., From Animals to Animats 2: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on the Simulation of Adaptive Behavior (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993) 71-80. and R.D. Beer, A qualitative in: J.-A. Meyer, H. Roitblat and S. Wilson, locomotion dynamical analysis [30] M. Giunti, Computers, dynamical systems, phenomena and the mind, Ph.D. Thesis, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN (1992). 214 R. D. Beer I) Artificral lnteiligence 72 (1 U9.q) /7.1-115 1311 D.E. Goldberg, Genetic, Algorithms in Search. Optimizution and Machine Learning (Addison- Wesley, Reading. MA. 1989). [32] D. Graham, [33] J.K. Hale and H. Koc;ak, Dynamics and Bifurcations [34] J.K. Hale, L.T. Magalhaes and control of walking Pattern and W.M. Oliva. An Introduction in insects, Adv. fr1sec.t Physiol. 18 (1985) 31-140. (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991). to infinite Dimensional Dynamical Systems--C;eometric [35] S.A. Harp. T. Samad Proceedings Third Theory (Springer-Verlag. and A. Guha. Towards New York, 1984). the genetic synthesis of neural networks, in: Irlternational Confererrcc on Genetic Algorithms. Fairfax. VA ( 1989) 360-369. I.161 I. Harvey, Untimed and misrepresented: Report CSRP 245. School of Cognitive Adaptation connectionism and Computing in Natural and Artificial Systems (University and Sciences. University (371 J.H. Holland, the computer metaphor, of Sussex of Michigan Press. Ann Technical (1992). Arbor. MI, 1975). (381 J.J. Hopfield, Neurons with graded response properties have collective computational properties like those of two-state I. Horswill. [39] [40\ P. Husbands neurons. Proc. Nut. Acad. Sci. 81 (1984) 3088-3092. analysis of adaptation and I. Harvey. Evolution and environment, Artif. vs. design: controlling Intel/. 73 (1995). autonomous to appear. robots. in: Proceedings Third Annual Conferenc,c on Al, Simulation and Plunning, Perth. Australia ( 1992) 139- 146. [4l] L.P. Kaelbling, (421 L.P. Kaelbling Learning and S.J. Rosenschein. in Embedded Systems (MIT Press. Cambridge. MA, 1993). Action and planning in embedded agents. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 6 (l-2) (1990) 35-38. (431 T.B. Kepler. L.F. Abbott and E. Marder. Reduction of conductance-based neuron models, Biol. Cybern. 66 (1992) 381-387. the earwig. tomorrow man. ‘). Artif. (441 D. Kirsch. Today [4Sl P. Maes, ed.. Designing Autonomous Agents (MIT Press. Cambridge. MA, 1990). 1461 S. Mahadevan inforcement [47] H.R. Maturana 1481 H.R. Maturana [49l J.-A. Meyer and F.J. Varela. Autopoiesis and Cognition and F.J. Varela. The Tree of Knowledge eds.. of behavior-based CA (1991) 768-773. (Reidel. Boston. MA, 1980). in: Proceedings AAAI-Yl, J. Connell. Automatic and learning, and S.W. Wilson. Intell. 47 (1991) 161-184. From Animals programming to Animats: (Shambhala, Anaheim, robots Boston. MA, 1987). using re- Proceedings of the First (MIT Press. Cambridge, MA, International 1991). Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior (501 G.F. Miller. P.M. Todd and S.U. Hegde. Designing neural networks International Conference on Genetic Algorithms. Proceedings Third (511 A. Newell and H.A. Simon. Computer science as empirical Commun. ACM 19 (1976) 113-126. using genetic algorithms, Fairfax. VA (1989) 379-384. search, symbols and inquiry: in: action potentials. in: J.C. Fentress, ed.. Simpler Networks and Sunderland. MA. 1976). Behavior [52] K.G. Pearson, Nerve cells without (Sinauer. [53] J.B. Pollack, The [54] Z.W. Pylyshyn. (551 J. Rinzel and G.B. Ermentrout, I. Segev. eds., Methods induction Computation of dynamical and Cognition Analysis recognizers. Mach. Learn. 7 (1991) 227-252. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1984). of neural excitability and oscillations. in: C. Koch and in Neuronal Modeling (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 1989). 1561 S.J. Rosenschein, (1985) 345-357. Formal theories of knowledge in AI and robotics. New G‘erz. Comput. 3 (4) (571 G. Sch6ner and J.A.S. Kelso, Dynamic pattern generation in behavioral and neural systems, Science 239 (1988) 1513-1520. [58] C.A. Skarda and W.J. Freeman, How brains make chaos in order to make sense of the world. Behav. Brain Sci. IO (1987) 161-195. (SY] T. Smithers. research, Conference on Artificial Life. Paris, France eliminative materialism in: Toward a Practice of Autonomous Taking (1992) 31-40. seriously: a methodology systems Systems: Proceedings of the First European for autonomous the proper (601 P. Smolensky. On (hl] T. van Gelder. What might treatment cognition of connectionism. be Science, Bloomington. IN (1992). if not computation. University Cognitive Behav. Brain Sci. 11 (1988) 1-74. ‘1, Technical Report 75, Indiana R.D. Beer I Artificial Intelligence 72 (199.5) 173-215 215 [62] X.-J. Wang and J. Rinzel, Alternating and synchronous rhythms in reciprocally inhibitory model neurons, Neural Comput. 4 (1992) M-97. (631 N. Wiener, Cybernetics (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2nd ed., 1961). (641 G. Wendler, The influence of proprioceptive feedback on locust flight coordination, J. Comput. Physiol. 88 (1974) 173-200. [65] G.M. Werner and M.G. Dyer, Evolution of communication in: C.G. Langton, C. Taylor, J.D. Farmer and S. Rasmussen, eds., Artificial Life II (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1991). in artificial organisms, [66] S. Wiggins, Introduction New York, 1990). to Applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Chaos (Springer-Verlag, [67] S.W. Wilson, Knowledge growth in an artificial animal, in: K.S. Narendra, ed., Adaptive and Learning Systems (Plenum Press, New York, 1986). 