Accepted ManuscriptBig Data analytics and Computational Intelligence for Cyber PhysicalSystems: Recent trends and state of the art applicationsRahat Iqbal, Faiyaz Doctor, Brian More, Shahid Mahmud, Usman YousufPII:DOI:Reference:S0167-739X(17)32328-2https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2017.10.021FUTURE 3760To appear in:Future Generation Computer SystemsReceived date : 22 November 2016Revised date :Accepted date : 12 October 20177 October 2017Please cite this article as: R. Iqbal, F. Doctor, B. More, S. Mahmud, U. Yousuf, Big Data analyticsand Computational Intelligence for Cyber Physical Systems: Recent trends and state of the artapplications, Future Generation Computer Systems (2017),https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2017.10.021This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service toour customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergocopyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form.Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect thecontent, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.Big Data Analytics and Computational Intelligence for Cyber Physical Systems: Recent Trends and State of the Art Applications  Rahat Iqbal1,2, Faiyaz Doctor1,3, Brian More1,4, Shahid Mahmud1, Usman Yousuf1 1Interactive Coventry Limited, Coventry University Technology Park, Puma Way, Coventry, CV1 2TT, United Kingdom, Email: r.iqbal@interactivecoventry.com; dr.faiyaz@interactivecoventry.com; sm@interactivecoventry.com; usman.yousuf@interactivecoventry.com;  2Faculty of Engineering, Environment & Computing School of Computing, Electronics and Mathematics Coventry University Priory Street Coventry, CV1 5FB, United Kingdom, Email:r.iqbal@coventry.ac.uk  3School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom, Email: fdocto@essex.ac.uk  4Coventry University Enterprise Ltd Coventry University Technology Park, Puma Way, Coventry, CV1 2TT, United Kingdom, Email: BMore@cad.coventry.ac.uk Big data is fueling the digital revolution in an increasingly knowledge driven and connected society by offering big data analytics and computational intelligence based solutions to reduce the complexity and cognitive burden on accessing and processing large volumes of data. In this paper, we discuss the importance of big data analytics and computational intelligence techniques applied to data produced from the myriad of pervasively connected machines and personalized devices offering embedded and distributed information processing capabilities. We provide a comprehensive survey of computational intelligence techniques appropriate for the effective processing and analysis of big data. We discuss a number of exemplar application areas that generate big data and can hence benefit from its effective processing. State of the art research and novel applications in health-care, intelligent transportation and social network sentiment analysis, are presented and discussed in the context of Big data, Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), and Computational Intelligence (CI). We present a data modelling methodology, which introduces a novel biologically inspired universal generative modelling approach called Hierarchical Spatial-Temporal State Machine (HSTSM). The HSTSM modelling approach incorporates a number of soft computing techniques such as: deep belief networks, auto-encoders, agglomerative hierarchical clustering and temporal sequence processing, in order to address the computational challenges arising from analyzing and processing large volumes of diverse data to provide an effective big data analytics tool for diverse application areas. A conceptual cyber physical architecture, which can accommodate and benefit from the proposed methodology, is further presented.  KeywCPS1. InThe acknor asoil hfueliBig (Cha     Big undeappliThe now words: Big D applications, ntroduction importance onowledged. Ths IBM's Chiefhas been instring an ever evdata can be dang, 2015a). Volume referbe in Zettabproduction linVelocity referspeed at whicseconds and bank transactVariety referstructured or possible to casocial media (Veracity refevolume of datValue refers automotive inData analyticerlying patterication contexoriginal Big evolved to deata, Big Data HSTSM of big data inhis ever-growif Executive Orumental in fuvolving 21st cedefined by the rs to the vast abytes or Bronnes for manufrs to the speech big data mthe speed of ions in milliss to the variounstructuredategorize the d(e.g., photos, ers to the mesta it can be mto providing ndustries to dics refers to thrns are reveaxt under invesData revolutieveloping comValuAnalytics, Cyn the informaing impact canOfficer recentlyueling the inentury digital rfive Vs (see amounts of dantobytes. For facturing vehicd at which bimove around. Fproduction liseconds.  ous types of dd which is didata into regutext messagesssiness or truessy and contameaningful inscover patternFigurhe techniquesaled, relationstigation are exion started wimplex data driBVeracityueyber Physical ation economn be summariy added: "Bigndustrial revolrevolution. Figure 1): Voata which are cexample, bicle instrumentig data are creFor example, ines for procdata collectedifficult to proular relational s) and industriustworthiness tain a lot of nonsight into birns in data leadre 1: 5Vs of bis used to exaships are idexposed. ith fundamentiven models fo5Vs ofBig DatVolumeSystems, Commy and to the ized in the stag Data is the nlution in the 2olume, Velocicreated and stig data createt clusters and eated, streamebig data movessing optic cd. The createdocess using trdatabases for ial productionof the createoise.  ig data. For eding to faults.ig data amine and prentified, and tal physics exor climate pref taVaVelocitymputational Inmodern waytement that "dnew oil" (Hir20th century sity, Variety, Vored every seced by social so forth. ed and aggregves from and character recod data can beraditional appexample, bign lines (e.g., sed data. Due xample analyrocess Big Daother insightxperiments at diction, weatharietyntelligence, Cy of life is wdata is the newrsch, 2013). Juso big data isVeracity and Vcond. The datmedia, indugated as well ato social medognition (OCRe structured, proaches. It ig data generateensory data). to the varietyysis of big datata so that hihts concerningCERN, and iher forecastinCI and widely w oil" ust as s now Value ta can ustrial as the dia in R) or semi-s not ed by y and ta for idden g the it has g and seismology. Gone are the days when the computation time to model the atomic nucleus data took 24 hours on a cray supercomputer, it now takes minutes or even seconds on a laptop. Big Data is now transmitted via hundreds of operational satellites where global positional resolution is expected to be 40 cm in a few years’ time. Recent advances in hardware and software technologies have enabled big data acquisition. This data can be harvested from a large number of diverse sources including emails and online transactions, multimedia information such as audio, video and pictures, large databases containing health records and other information. In addition, information can be captured during a user's interaction with social media such as posts, status updates etc., data derived from search queries or click patterns of a user, physiological data such as heart rate, skin conductivity etc. as captured from wearable sensors, data derived and extracted from our interaction with our mobile devices, embedded artifacts inside a smart home, data from production machines and industrial robots, scientific research and other sources (Eaton, 2012). It is clear from the above that in the modern world data is being generated at an accelerated rate (Villars, 2011). The potential utilization of this huge amount of information has catapulted Big Data and Big data analysis as a central focus for modern research communities, modern businesses, and governments (Hashem, 2015) working towards delivering the promise of a plethora of new application areas and opportunities which can emerge under completely diverse application contexts from smart cities (Hashem, 2016) to digital health care (Murdoch, 2013). As a result the benefits arising from this wealth of knowledge and information can affect research in numerous ways. These can include : promoting medical advances by providing evidence in the identification of symptoms and patterns concerning diseases, pandemics and modern health issues; or aiding in the creation of large ground truth databases for scientific fields such as sentiment analysis, which are in desperate need of vast amounts of data in order to successfully create models of human affect and effective behavior recognition techniques. The businesses that constitute the modern economy can also greatly benefit from Big Data and Big Data analytics since they can utilize the data generated from the interaction of users with social network (Yaqoob, 2016) or smart devices in order to identify the users' preferences towards a product, recognize dissatisfaction of modern clients, or understand the relationships between competitive and collaborating organizations, thus creating better and more appealing products and services , or improving existing ones. Nowadays huge quantities of personalized and contextualized information are generated in platforms such as social networks extending to wearable devices, where millions of people interact and express their opinions and emotions. The development of advanced Big Data analytics and computational intelligence techniques enables the development of intelligent computerized solutions with the help of social and behavioral data based sentiment analysis. Sentiment analysis aims to improve products and services, by automatically identifying the user's opinion, including their evaluations and affective state (Karyotis, 2017). Acquiring more nuanced insights of customer preferences and needs will provide modern organizations and businesses with a crucial advantage over their competition (Sagiroglu, 2013). For instance, big data received from electronic communications can be used to enable employees to become more emotionally resilient in the work place. As mentioned in (Hirsch, 2013) Big Data “is becoming a significant corporate asset, a vital economic input, and the foundation of new business models" (Hirsch, 2013). Businesses and organizations can benefit from Big Data through the deployment of technologies such as Cloud Computing services which would allow for meeting the storage and processing requirements of Big Data analysis (Chang, 2015b). In Chang and Will's work, a balanced approach to comparing non Cloud to Cloud storage was presented and realized by utilizing the appropriate experimental set up and metrics. From the team's experimental results a significant performance improvement was observed in relation to execution times, consistency between expected and actual execution times, and efficiency, when Cloud approaches were used compared to the case when non-Cloud systems were utilized (Chang and Wills, 2016b). Nowadays, Cyber-physical cloud systems (CPS) have emerged as state of the art cloud-based architectures, which are utilized in a wide range of applications. CPS can be defined as hierarchical architectures, where devices located in the physical layer need to communicate and transact securely with computing and communication resources in the cyber layer. These complex interactions include several Big Data related operations, such as sensing, storing, and processing large amounts of heterogeneous data. Therefore, it is extremely challenging to effectively handle these operations in terms of crucial aspects, such as security and energy management. Security is of outmost importance since in CPS environments a variety of sensitive transactions are performed (e.g. selling and buying of energy). Efficient energy management is also a widely acknowledged research challenge for CPS, which has a significant impact on provided services, but also the environment. CPS research can largely benefit from intelligent computational intelligence and Big Data analytics techniques in order to tackle these modern challenges. Big Data analytics can also facilitate government's efforts towards delivering better services to their citizens. Big Data can aid governments in improving crucial sectors such as healthcare and public transport thus helping to shape a more efficient modern society. For example, Big Data analytics and computational intelligence techniques are able to provide intelligent solutions for challenging problems such as health shock prediction, or optimization of the public transport services delivered by the state to the population. In order to capitalize on the advantages of Big Data analytics in an increasingly knowledge driven society there is a need to develop solutions that reduce the complexity and cognitive burden on accessing and processing these large volumes of data in both embedded hardware and software-based data analytics (Maniak, 2015) (Iqbal, 2015). Big challenges stem from the utilization of Big Data in the real world, since the implementation of real time applications is becoming increasingly complex. This complexity derives from a variety of data-related factors. One factor is the high dimensionality degree which a dataset may possess thus increasing the difficulty of processing and analyzing the data. The interactions, co-relations and causal effects of these high dimensional data parameters in relation to the behaviours and specific outcomes of these systems are often too complex to be analysed and understood by human users. Additionally, data can be accumulated from diverse sources and input channels, making online processing very demanding due to the variety of signal inputs which need to be synchronized, and diverse data types which need to be analyzed simultaneously. Furthermore, the collected data is often comprised of multiple types of inputs, which are also not always precise or complete due to various sources of imprecision, uncertainty, or missing data (e.g. malfunctioning or inaccurate sensors). Moreover, there is an inherent need in real life applications for high-speed storage, processing of data and retrieval of the corresponding analysis results. Another factor that should be taken into account is that the method utilized for Big Data analytics should extract knowledge from data in an interpretable way. The computational techniques deployed to perform this task should make the underlying patterns, which exist in the data, transparent to the person who wishes to utilize and understand them. Finally, there is a need for techniques performing online adaptation to incorporate contextual and user-specific elements in their design, and decision-making mechanism, in a user friendly and computationally feasible manner. All the above factors should be reflected in the computational and machine learning techniques utilized in order to process and analyze Big Data so that successful applications and models can be constructed (Suthaharan, 2014). The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses computation intelligence for big data analytics. Section 3 presents our novel methodology to provide solutions to data driven problems. Section 4 presents few examples of application areas in which the data driven methodology is applied. Section 5 concludes the paper.  2. Computational Intelligence for Big Data analytics Machine learning (ML) approaches are used for modelling patterns and correlations in data in order to discover relationships and make predictions based on unseen data / events. ML approaches consist of supervised learning (learning from labelled data), unsupervised learning (discovering hidden patterns in data or extracting features) and reinforcement learning (goal oriented learning in dynamic situations) (Mitchell, 1997). As such, ML approaches can also be categorised into: regression techniques, clustering approaches, density estimation methods and dimensionality reduction approaches. Non-exhaustive examples of these approaches are: Decision tree learning, Associate rule learning, Artificial neural networks, deep learning support vector machines, clustering and Bayesian networks. Computational Intelligence (CI) is a subclass of ML approaches where algorithms have been devised to imitate human information processing and reasoning mechanisms for processing complex and uncertain data sources. CI techniques form a set of nature-inspired computational methodologies and techniques which have been developed to address complex real-world data-driven problems for which mathematical and traditional modelling are unable to work due to: high complexity, uncertainty and stochastic nature of processes. Fuzzy Logic (FL), Evolutionary Algorithms (EA) and Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) form the trio of core CI approaches that have been developed to handle this growing class of real-world problems. FL is an established methodology to deal with imprecise and uncertain data (Zadeh, 1965). FL provides an approach for approximate reasoning and modelling of qualitative data and adaptive control (Doctor, 2016) (Liu, 2014) based on the use of linguistic quantifiers (fuzzy sets) for representing uncertain real-word, data and user-defined concepts and human interpretable fuzzy rules that can be used for inference and decision-making. EAs are based on the process of natural selection for modelling stochastic systems (Whitley, 2001) and approaches such as genetic algorithms, genetic programming and swarm intelligence optimisation algorithms (Dreier, 2002) (Poi, 2008) (Parpinelli, 2011) can be used for optimising complex real-world systems and processes. Finally ANNs enable feature extraction and learning from experiential data (Haykin, 2009) and are based on imitating the parallel processing and data representation structure of neurons in animal and humans brains. A NN is an interconnected assembly of basic elements (artificial neurons) that broadly speaking resemble the neurons existing in our brains. The analyzing ability of neural networks is hidden in the values of the weights that connect these basic elements. These weights are acquired by adaptation, or by learning from training data (Gurney 1997). A combination of CI techniques can be used to extract insight and meaning from the data, offering integrated solutions, which can be applied to a variety of application domains. Such solutions should be adapted to offline and online, hardware and software data processing and control requirements, which can be further optimised to domain dependent constraints and dynamics. Hence these approaches can be used to provide effective multipurpose intelligent data analysis and decision support systems for a variety of industrial and commercial applications characterized by large amounts of vague or complex information requiring analysis to support operational and cost effective decision-making (Doctor, 2013). 2.1 Deep learning for Big Data analytics In Big Data analytics there is a growing need to accurately identify important features in the data affecting the outputs, and to determine the spatial co-relations between input variables at a given point in time as well as the causal or temporal co-relations between input parameters that change overtime. Effective modelling to identify patterns from these data sources can be employed to produce accurate predictions of how a system is supposed to behave under normal operational conditions, and enable the detection of abnormalities. Deep learning algorithms have attracted increasing attention by providing effective biologically inspired computational modelling techniques for addressing tasks such as speech perception and object recognition by extracting multiple levels of representation from various sensory inputs and signals (Bekkerman, 2011) (Bengio, 2009) (Hinton,2012) (Le, 2013) (Campo, 2014). These approaches can offer the means to model large-scale data with significant dimensionality as well as spatial and temporal correlations for sequence modelling tasks. Deep Learning (DL) approaches are based on the principle of using ANNs with multiple hidden layers as shown in Figure 1. This allows both unsupervised (bottom-up) training to generate higher level representations of sensory data which can then be used for training a classifier (top down) based on standard supervised training algorithms (Hinton, 2006). Feature learning methods are based on supervised approaches such as Deep NNs, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), and Recurrent NNs along with unsupervised techniques such as Deep Belief Networks and CNNs and provide deep architecture that combine structural elements of local receptive fields, shared weights, and pooling that aims to imitate the processing of simple and complex cortical cells found in animal vision systems (Korekado, 2003). The potential of utilizing deep learning techniques in Big Data analytics has been highlighted by recent review studies (Tolk, 2015) (Chen, 2015). In the work by Tolk et al. deep learning potential as a modelling approach and as a means to discover correlations from data is highlighted. Based on a thorough review of recent applications, the researchers argue that Big Data and deep learning have the potential to provide a new generation of modelling and simulation applications (Tolk, 2015). The ability of DL methods to handle cases where the amount of data is huge is also discussed in the work by Chen et al. (Chen, 2015). This work has demonstrated the key role of deep learning approaches for solving Big Data analytics problems. There are a number of recent examples of research in applying optimized and enhanced deep learning techniques in order to analyze and process Big Data. More specifically in the work by Zaidi et al., the researchers present an algorithm for Deep Broad Learning which can be tuned in order to specify the depth of the mode, and this has achieved notable accuracy of performance for a large amount of data which can be considered competitive with other state of the art research (Zaidi, 2015). In (Alsheikh, 2016) the research addresses a very modern challenge arising from the large amount of data, which can be collected through mobile devices. The team explores deep learning as a technique for mobile Big Data analytics and presents a scalable learning framework for Apache Spark. From the experimental results, it can be seen that the team's framework achieves a significant increase in the speed of learning process for deep learning models, which are comprised of a large number of hidden layers and parameters. In the work by Lv et al., the researchers applied a deep learning technique that takes into accowiththat they increinveoptimscaleallow 2.2 FBig potencontlogicdata.databhumFuzzhaveretai(Wusincerelieexistdata degrsysteappliFuzzaccoburdhugeFuzzareasrulesordetradeount spatial anh the purpose deep neural are computaease of a factostigated deepmization algoe, have demwing deep neuFuzzy Logic fData analyticntially noise ain a large amc systems are. For examplbases that coman emotion (Wzy systems hae better or simining a highlu,2010)(Karyoe it allows thees on the natuting in data, thto easily visuree of visualizems, which aications (Iqbazy Logic systeount for indivden, thus makie amounts of dzy Logic has s. Behadada es. They have uer to constructeoff between nd temporal cof achieving anetworks demationally expenor of 10 compp neural networithm. The exonstrated a ural network trfor Big Data s creates chalinfected sourmount of noise CI applicatile creating mntain a large Wu, 2012). ave proven themilar performaly satisfactorotis, 2015). The delivery of cural language hus enabling ualize these unzation and inteas recognizedal, 2011) (Iqbems have demvidual differening them an exdata (Karyotisbeen utilizedet al. have prutilized large t a system for accuracy and orrelations ina high performmonstrate verynsive as they ared to other work trainingxperimental rsignificant peraining by utilFiguranalytics llenges concerrces. These dse and outlierons, which camodels to preamount of ueir ability to dance levels asy tradeoff his is anotherclassification fuzzy rules itthe users of anderlying relaerpretability cd by researchal, 2013). Finmonstrated conces and contxcellent choics, 2016) (Karyd as a basis foesented a metpublicly availheart rate arrhinterpretabilin order to utilmance (Lv, 20y high perfory require trainapproaches (Cg by utilizingresults, whicherformance ilizing Big Dat re 2. DNN strurning the natudata sets arer artifacts. Pran efficientlyedict the useruncertainty, wdeal with this s other more between clasr crucial factoresults in a ret allows for aapplications orations (Doctorcontributes to h is a very nally, Fuzzy Lonsiderable potextual informce for creatingyotis, 2015) (Dfor performingthodology forlable data setsrhythmia detecity (Behadadaize Big Data 015). In the prmance in patning time, whiChung, 2014).g the data ph were calculancrease withta in a suitableucture. ure of the datasubject to hievious researy handle inherr's emotions which is assocchallenge, recomplex techssification acor when dealieasonable amoa successful vr researchersr, 2012). Deveimproving thimportant issLogic systemsotential concermation with a g personalisedDoctor, 2005).g Big Data anr semi-automas, data from exction. Their rea, 2015). Fuzztowards traffipaper by Chunttern recognitiich in some c. More specifiarallel Hessiaated on speecout decreasine amount of tia accumulatedigh degrees och has demonrent uncertainusually reliesciated with thsulting in robhniques, whileccuracy and ing with hugeount of time. Svisualization osearching for eloping applice usability aspsue for succes and more sprning their abvery reasonad and user-frie. nalytics in diatically definixperts, and exesults demonszy logic has alfic flow predicng et al. it is stion tasks howcases can reacically, researcan-free 2nd ch tasks of a ng accuracy, ime. d from diversof uncertaintynstrated that fnties related ts on dealing he fuzzy natubust systems we at the sametime performe amounts ofSince Fuzzy Lof hidden relahidden pattercations with apects of develessful commepecifically adability to modeable computatendly systems ifferent applicing fuzzy parxperimental dastrate an applilso been usedction, stated wever ch an ch has order large thus e and y and fuzzy to the with ure of which time mance f data Logic ations rns in a high loped ercial aptive el and tional from cation rtition ata in icable d by a numopinsystethat timefuzzyclinito hafiguroutpinto combby ddefufuzzy2.3 EEvolchallof th2005analy(BhareseaBig-probEvolwhicand EEG2015paramin ththe ftune are demois repof thobjefitnegeneprob mber of applicanion (Glosh, 2em (FMM systhis system hs (Bing, 2014y logic basedical decision sandle data frore 3, which cout processor. a fuzzy numbined to map domain expeuzzification ofy output. Evolutionary lutionary algolenges of Big he optimal so5). EA are verysis, since Battacharya, 20archers develoData ready, blems showedlutionary algoch are utilizedothers. EA haG signal, towa5). GA's can meters of predhe work by Kafuzzy sets usedthe system anwidely used onstrative exapresented by he problem. Ictive functioness of the inderate new offsblem is achievations which u2016) (Bing, stem) was devhad a very go4). In anotherd matching alsupport. The dom various soonsists of fourThe fuzzifier mber. The infeinput fuzzy serts, or experf the output fuFigalgorithms forithms (EA)Data analyticolution of a spry good exploBig Data are016). This prooped an EA was was acknd that the aporithms are alsd in Big Data Aave also beenards modern analso be useddictive modelaryotis et al., td to develop and it was ableevolutionaryample of their a chromosomIn the beginnn is calculateddividuals. Thepring. This pred. utilize Big Dat2014). For exveloped in ordod predictingr interesting algorithms anddeveloped sysources (Duggar main componis responsibleerence engine ets to output frimental datauzzy sets that gure 3. Fuzzy for Big Data a) are anothercs. Evolutionarpecific probleorers of the see subject to oblem was inwith the abilityowledged in pproach perfoso proven techAnalysis such n used by recend demandingd in combinas and facilitatthe researchera model for repe to improve ty algorithms workflow canme comprising ning, an initiad (such as vale chromosomerocess is repeaata extracted frxample in theder to mine Tg performanceapplication in d MapReducestem demonstral, 2015). An nents: the fuze for mappinge is responsiblfuzzy sets. Rua. Finally, threfers to the Logic Systemanalytics r CI techniquary algorithmsem by evolvinearch space wha very highnvestigated in y to deal with the paper, thormed very whniques for a nh as clustering ent research ig application ation with othte the developrs utilized a gpresenting thethe accuracy based on thn be observedof genes thatal populationlues of an erres with the bated until a so rom social nete work by BiTwitter data. Te whilst at thethe field of me in order to prated a high lexample Fuzzzzifier, the infeg a crisp valuele for the wales are if-thenhe output progeneration ofm (Mendel 200ue, which ca mimic the evng a populatiohich makes thh degree of the paper byboth issues. Ahe initial evawell comparednumber of ma(Razavi, 2015in conjunctionareas such as her techniquepment of moreenetic algorithe user's emotioof the proposhe Darwiniand in figure 4. At correspond tn is defined aror function). best fitness vaolution that sattworks for theng et al., a mThe experimene same time hmedicine, Dugperform Big evel of flexibzy Logic systerence enginee such as a senay the fuzzy rn statements, wocessor is ref a crisp value01). an meet the volution proceon of candidahem excellent dimensionality BhattacharyAlthough the aaluation to idd to other machine learnin5), feature seln with signal multi-brain ces in order toe accurate systhm to optimizons. The GA wed model (Kan theory of A solution for o different vaand for everyThis value walues are comtisfies a stop ce analysis of pmatrix-based ntal results shhad low proceuggal et al. utiData analyticbility and wastem can be see, the rules, annsory measurerules are firedwhich are extresponsible foe for the prodrequirementsess to the discoate solutions tools for Bigty and sparsya et al. wherapplication wadentify benchmodern techning related problection (Lin, 2inputs such acomputing (Ko optimize setems. For examze the propertiwas used offliaryotis 2017).evolution, aa specific proalues of paramy chromosomwould represenmbined in ordcriterion to a gpublic fuzzy owed essing ilized cs for s able een in nd the ement d and racted r the duced s and overy (Sun, Data eness re the as not hmark iques. blems 2016), as the attan, everal mple, ies of ine to GAs and a oblem meters me, an nt the der to given  3. PrIn thsettinpredworlour pmoddeveapprbelieproccompthe sthe s(HawThe layerof in3.1 DThe infradevisurvinpu3.2 IAs dthe aand ratesis boproc3.3 Droposed datahis section, wengs. This apprdiction applicald big data prproposed datadelling approaeloped on the roach is basedef networks, cessing (Maniplex correlatiosystem (phrasstructure and wkins, 2004) (main elemenr, spatial poolnformation or Data Layer data layer isastructure conce states andey data) and suts). Input layer  data is being dapplication of interpolate ovs, missing infooth precise ancess, the data oData TransfoFigura modelling me discuss a noroach has alreation describedroblems. Basea modelling mach called Hiunderstandind on a hybrid auto-encodeiak, 2016). Oons between ied in this worfunctions of(Hawkins, 200nts of our propling, temporalapplication las responsible nsisting of hard sensors signsoftware data derived from ddata fusion tever parameterormation and nd contains nooutput needs tormation Layre 4. Genetic amethodologyovel data modeady been usedd in section 4ed on the latesmethodology inierarchical Spng of the strucmethod incorers, agglomeur approach nput values anrk as spatial-tf the mamma09). posed methodl inferences, payer as shown for capturingrdware and Innals); manualsources (strucdifferent sourcechniques. Hers from heterovariations in ao or little noiso be encoded yer algorithm flowdelling methodd successfully4, and is able st discoveriesntroduces a nopatial-Temporcture and funrporating seveerative hieraris able to hand temporal ctemporal correalian brain badology includeprediction moin Figure 5. g heterogeneonternet of Thil input data ctured and unces there is a ere sensor dataogeneous dataaccuracies. It e. In order to in a specific wwchart (Kang 2dology that cay towards the to provide sol in the field oovel biologicaral State Macnctionality of teral soft comprchical clusteandle high voconsequences elations). Theased on a thee data layer, odel, optimizatous and homoings (IoT) datsources (opernstructured texneed for it toa fusion techna streams thatis crucial to amake meaninway. 2011). an be applied development lutions to otheof neuroscienclly inspired unchine (HSTSMthe human brputing techniqering and telumes of databetween diffeapproach is mory proposedinput layer, dtion and finalogeneous datata sources (digrator actuationxt, documents,be effectivelyiques are usedwould have acquire high-qngful use of thin diverse bigof the taxi demer challengingce the core paniversal generM) that has rain. The propques such as: emporal sequa characteriseerent input statmodelled to md by Jeff Hawdata transformlly the presenta from an exigital and analons, checklists, images and ay pre-processed to combine, different samquality data, whe data acqui g data mand g real art of rative been posed deep uence ed by tes of mimic wkins mation tation isting logue s and audio ed by align mpling which sition Data transformation layer deals with transforming the pre-processed data into machine readable codes by the use of encoders. Input data is initially encoded into what is termed as a Sparse Distributed Representation (SDR) (Hawkins, 2009) which decomposes the representation of information over thousands of bits. Here at any point in time a small percentage of these bits may be activated, i.e. equal to 1’s emulating the firing response patterns of neurons in the brain. Each bit represents a feature of information and a set of activated bits is therefore able to encode the semantic attributes of what is being represented. These bits are unlabeled and the associated semantics meanings are learnt. Hence if different SDRs have activate bits in the same location then they can be considered to spatially share the sematic attributes and we can use this to learn the spatial correlations between different input patterns as will be discussed in the following section. 3.4 Spatial Modelling The discovery of correlations between individual inputs (bits) are determined through the spatial transformation of input space into a transformed feature space that is achieved through the use of deep belief networks, where this process is referred to as spatial pooling (Hawkins 2004). Hierarchical clustering is performed on the transformed features derived from the deep belief network, to extract a number of possible states of the modelled system. The main purpose of this operation is for reducing the input space to a fixed number of the most probable states of the underlying system being modelled. In the beginning of the modelling process, raw process data is generated by the relevant data sources and is transformed from its textual - human readable form, to binary sparsely distributed format. Data encoding aims to map the inputs defined for a specific modelling problem to discrete signals that can be understood by the HSTSM. The encoded vector is compressed, and an automatic process of feature extraction is performed with the use of deep belief neural networks (DBN). The trained restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) forming the DBN are used to initialize the deep auto-encoder. This unsupervised method of feature extraction enables us to acquire an improved and more compressed representation of the input space. Because of the unsupervised nature of the process, there is no need for labeling the data at this stage. Therefore, the algorithm is able to cope successfully with high volumes of data. The features extracted are used to automatically identify a set of possible patterns on the inputs to the model. This would correspond to a set of possible states of the monitored system. In order to achieve this we incorporate into the model agglomerative hierarchical analysis, which is an unsupervised method of cluster analysis. The basic metric used to conduct this analysis is defined to be the Euclidian distance. This process can be considered as spatial pooling, where the original binary input that occur close together in space are pooled together. This operation enables the extraction of a set of individual system states, and the analysis of the temporal sequence of input activities in terms of these states. 3.5 Temporal Modelling The initial stage of the approach performs hierarchical organization of multiple levels of data abstraction to identify correlations between temporal sequences of input patterns. Temporal sequence learning is used to train the model on different temporal consequential relations between probable states of the system. This is used to infer the next predicted state of the inputs in comparison with the actual behaviour of the system, which is termed as temporal inference. Temporal inference is performed on the identified states, and prediction of the next possible state of the system can be achieved with the utilization of an n-order Markov chain. Prediction acquired in this way can be consequently used to identify specific patterns of behavior of the modelling problem under investigation. At the end of this process, the predicted vector can be compared with the actual vector, generated at each moment in a specific application context, in order to identify specific patterns or irregular behavior. This can be achieved with the use of distance function or basic ML techniques, like a Multilayer Perceptron. 3.6 Prediction Model The spatial pooling and temporal inference elements of the approach hence combine to produce a spatial temporal model of the operational behaviour of the system being modelled. The model can then be used in combination with prediction and classification approaches such as standard ANNs to predict future behaviour of the system under different operational conditions and detect deviations and changes in behaviour that might signify an underlying unknown effect or problem. 3.7 Optimisation The procbaseusedfor dtherewhicdevi3.8 AThe visuainterrepreA comethparaduser.spacsuppbetwUltraprediction mocesses based oed approachesd to simulate wdetermining oefore be usedch could be thces.  Application Llayer is resalization whicrface can alsesentation in oonceptual cybhodology, candigm, data ca. The aforemece to cyber-spaport to the usween cyber ana Wide Bandodel can furthn quantitatives such as genewhat if scenarioptimal states d as a means he result of envLayer sponsible for ch can providso be personorder to meet Fber physical an be found inaptured from sentioned data,ace. This dataser via the smnd physical wod, WiFi, RFIDher provide ine and qualitatietic algorithmios through thof the procesto determinevironmental edisplaying te stakeholdernalized in tethe individualFigure 5. Big Darchitecture, wn the work bysensors and ac, along with da can be procemart phone. Inorld, via a ranD) (Hossain, 2nputs to an opive inputs fromms and swarmhe simultaneouss, system or e behaviour ceffects, humanthe results thr insight into terms of the l users’ needs Data modellinwhich can acy Hossain et aactuators locatdata related toessed in ordern this case, tnge of commu2017). The ptimisation fram various soum intelligence us optimal estscenario beinchanges and dn behaviour chhrough the ithe data beingtype and fu. ng methodologccommodate al. (Hossain,ted in a smarto location infor to provide inthe user’s phounication techroposed data mework that urces. Here evooptimisation timation of unng modelled. Tdeviations of hange or faultsinterface of g modelled. Thunctional formgy and benefit f 2017) (See phone, are uormation, are ntelligent recoone is the cohnologies (e.gmodeling meis able to optolutionary sysalgorithms canknown paramThis approachcomplex syss in equipmenan applicatioThe visualizatim of inform from the prop Figure 6). Inused to monitosent from phyommendationsonnecting integ., Bluetooth, ethodology caimise stems an be meters h can tems, nt and on or on or mation posed n this or the ysical s, and erface GPS, an be accocontrsucc4. PoBig valutranschall4.1 HIn revariodelivalgorchallveloand techntheirproteanalycolleactivtechnthis pdemaAn eintroThe in orCPSdesigwithommodated inribute to the ecessful machinFigotential ApplData and CI ce. In this sectsportation, solenges in thesHealth Servicecent years, wous healthcarevery practices rithms able tolenges of the city data are pprocessed tinologies can br services. Thiein data fromyse the cost ected for diagvity and emotinologies shoupaper, in ordeanding time aexample of reoduced a moniteam have prrder to suppor that was basgned for patieh a unified stann this and simefficient manipne learning-bagure 6. Healthlication areascan be utilizetion, we provcial network e domains. ces and Healtwe have witne applications and services.o tackle the annew age (Ahproduced frommely and efbenefit from ais data includem scientific inof medical gnosis such aion data colleuld possess dater to deal withand computatioecent researchitoring systemresented a clourt healthcare msed on cloud ent-centric heandard, a data ilar architectupulation and eased research ah shock predics d in order to vide examplessentiment anath Shock Prednessed the intdomains. Mo In order to analysis, synthmed, 2013). Cm various devffectively. Noa variety of dae: research datnstitutions; mservices, storas medical imected by standta analytics anh the diverse nonal requiremh in health CPm that utilizes ud supported monitoring (Hand big dataalthcare applicmanagement ures that interexploitation ofand commerciction research provide noves of opportunialysis, and prdiction troduction of odern health Cachieve their ghesis, processiCPSs face Bigvices in differowadays, giveata sources cota such as clinmedical billingred in geogramage and eledard wearablend modeling tnature and coments. PSs is the papa multimodalCPS able to uHossain, 2017)a analytics teccations and selayer for distrrface with edgf data, as wellial applicationmethodology l applicationsities for improresent novel afadvanced cyCPSs are able tgoals CPSs shng of data, ang Data problerent formats, aen the right ontaining richnical trial, andg and insuranaphically dispectronic medi devices and tools, based onmplexity of thper by Hossail approach comuse smart-pho). In Zhang et chnologies, wervices and conributed storagge level embel as facilitate tns.  (Hossain, 201with scientifioved health sapplications tyber-physical to replace tradould be equipnd the integraems since largand this data tools are prinformation, d screening dace data, whicpersed databaical records (other forms(Zn the methodhe aforementin et al.. Herembining voiceones, cloud coal.’s work a Cwas presented.nsisted of a dage and paralleledded systemsthe developme17). fic and commeservices, optimthat tackle mosystems (CPditional healthpped with powation of technoge amounts ofneeds to be srovided intellin order to deata, clinical gech can be usases; clinical (EMR); indivZhang, 2017).dology describioned data soue researchers e and EEG sigomputing and CPS called He. This systemata collection l computing, s, and ent of ercial mized odern S) in h-care werful ology f high stored ligent eliver ene or ed to data vidual CPS bed in urces, have gnals. CPS, ealth-m was layer and a data-oriented service layer (Zhang, 2017). In the paper by Wang et al. a cyber physical architecture consisting of a communication core, a computation core, and resource scheduling and management core was presented, and the authors provided examples of its application to healthcare monitoring and decision support systems (Wang, 2011). Health services can benefit patients and clinicians by providing optimised health information and recommendations, based on individual and population-based profiling, and using advanced Big Data analytics algorithms. Gaining a better insight into an individual’s healthcare needs is of central importance in order to provide tailored treatment and formulate therapy intervention recommendations. Moreover, this extends to fitness, lifestyle, social care and wellbeing monitoring, based on personalised preferences and goals that can be used to promote positive health, support behaviour change related to diet, exercise, and reduction of stress, and effective management of changing care needs such as for the elderly. Monitoring and delivering these services though personal (Harding, 2015), cloud based (Sultan,2014), mHealth (Free, 2013) and Internet of Things (IoT) applications (Pang, 2015) will help to empower people to manage their health and life style more effectively, owing to reduced healthcare costs. Computational health informatics can be used on large population based data through the development of interpretable decision support models for promoting effective health policy, and intervention planning for crisis management related to disease epidemics and famine. Dementia is an age related, progressive, neurodegenerative condition, also considered to be one of the biggest global public health challenges that the current generation needs to face. The growing prevalence of diseases such as Alzheimer’s, and their impact on a society benefiting from greater longevity, is a critical health challenge of national importance. Managing patients with dementia calls for improvements in effectively monitoring the progress of their condition, adjusting therapy interventions, and adapting to changing care needs (Doctor, 2014). Advanced deep learning approaches can be used to enable the development of context aware dementia monitoring, and predictive care recommendation solutions that can intelligently forecast behaviour changes of individual patients, from utilising contextual heterogeneous data, while handling uncertainties associated with incorporating qualitative data from stakeholders. Human interpretable care recommendation decisions can provide care staff with the means of implementing evolving care and therapy plans, in response to the changing needs of patients due to the effects of cognitive decline. Big data analytics and computational intelligence techniques are also able to facilitate governments and organizations provide solutions to challenging problems. Health shock is a health related event with a heavy impact on a household because of the cost of treatment, or the absence from work caused by the health related event. Health shock especially affects individuals in developing and underdeveloped countries. Government, organizations, policy makers, and individuals could largely benefit from the development of intelligent Big Data analytics techniques to battle health shock by facilitating accurate prediction and by highlighting the factors contributing to this phenomenon. These techniques will enable effective and timely mitigation and management of health shock events. In order to address this problem and contribute in this direction a Big Data analytics and visualization framework based on fuzzy logic was presented, which utilized a large-scale dataset towards health shock prediction purposes (Mahmud, 2016). The researchers utilized cloud Amazon web services integrated with Geographical Information Systems (GIS) to facilitate the collection, storage, indexing, and visualization of data for different stakeholders using smart devices, and develop their framework (Mahmud 2016). The dataset utilized comprised of data from questionnaires, and an online system where each data sample comprised of 47 features. Data were gathered from 1000 households belonging to 29 villages in rural areas of Pakistan. The collected data where pre-processed and analyzed by utilizing expert-opinion to extract meaningful measures related to living standards, health risk, accessibility to health facilities and income allocation labeled with a level of health shock incurred. A fuzzy rule summarization technique was utilized in order to develop a health-shock prediction model. The proposed predictive fuzzy model was evaluated by utilizing k-fold cross validation. An overview of the research methodology can be seen in figure 7. The model achieved a very high performance of 89%, while at the same time retained a very high interpretability degree with the help of the extracted natural language fuzzy rules. These rules can enable all relevant stakeholders to understand the causal factors affecting this phenomenon, and make informed and effective decisions. Moreover as demonstrated by the team's experimental results the proposed framework was also able to deliver results in competitive times with a low computational burden thus making it suitable for real-time and Big Data settings. Furthermore, data were mapped to the iron triangle model (Kissick, 1994) under the socio-economic, geographical, and cultural norms, and factors that lead to health-shock.  4.2 IThe devecommanalyreseavehiexamThe challvehiand gooddeveforecwas can CPSimpaet alas wsystecontrreinftogetsuchA nuobjecongaim the ddownFigIntelligent Trgrowth of elopment of emuters. The ytics capabiliarch and comcular networkmple is the woauthors inveslenges and socular clouds (forecasting. Ads and peoplelopment and casting modeldemonstratedbe used in ors will affect acting upon th.’s work new well as optimiems; enhancerol systems (force CPS systher. Their reh as improved umber of initiactives in relagestion (Djaheto address thidelivery of pnload, and cagure 7. Healthransportationmodern urbaefficient transboast in wireities, mobile mmercial applik technologieork by Wan estigated an apolutions regar(Wan, 2014). Accurate traffe, and more maintenance l for short-termd by the teamrder to effectithe design ohe developmeresearch areaze the tradeoed vehicle ch(Baheti, 2011stems with an esults demonsfuel consumpatives have beation to imprel, 2015) (Vegis through thepersonalised cashing of con shock predictn anised and insportation infeless communcloud computcations in thees to cloud-aet al., where pplication scenrding contextOne of the mfic prediction informed anof transport im traffic cond’s experimentively forecastof aircrafts, aint of next gens consist of: nff among theeck, health m1). Besselink integrated logstrated that opption (Besselineen implemenroving user mgni, 2013). See smart managcontent based ntent for on  tion research ncreasingly cfrastructures tnication technuting, and cone transportatioassisted contea multi-layerenario concernt aware hazarmost prominencould providend efficient dinfrastructure.ditions in vehtal results, thet short-term tir traffic manneration air trnew processesse goals; intemonitoring, met al. investgistic system tptimized internk, 2016). nted to satisfy mobility, utilielf-learning cgement of infd on availabildemand servmethodology connected ruto better supniques, compntext-aware teon field. This ext-aware vehed context-awning dynamic rd prediction,nt application e improved rodecision maki Very recent hicular CPS weir proposed fraffic (Chen, nagement systransportation ss to achieve gregrated flight management; atigated the pto organize thraction betwepersonalised ty, and satisfars (Jaguar Lfotainment deity of WiFi cvices. This fo(Mahmud 20ral environmport the needputational inteechnologies, gincludes the uhicular CPS. ware architectuparking servi, dynamic veareas of CPS oute planning ing for traffiwork by Chewithin urban enfuzzy Markov2017). It is atems, and avsystems. As idreater capacitydeck systemsand research potential of IChe movement oen the tracks and contextuafaction while and Rover Delivery to pre-connections, ocuses a lot o16). ments requiresds of visitorselligence andgave rise to nupgrade of cu A demonstrure was preseices, and discuehicle routingis traffic guidg and movemeic managemeen et al. provinvironments. v prediction malso predictedviation safety,dentified in By, improved sas, and autonorelated to aiCT technologof trucks travehas clear benalised user dee helping to aevelopment, 2-emptively masmart anticipon approache s the s and d data novel urrent rative ented. ussed , and dance ent of nt or ded a As it model d that thus Baheti afety, mous rcraft gy to elling nefits efined avoid 2016) anage patory es for information retrieval and its delivery based on ad hoc communication networks (Alhabashneh, 2017) (Iqbal, 2015) (Qureshi, 2017). Understanding each driver’s behaviour and information needs in terms of their intentions can be used to provide relevant information and services as they are needed which can be used to improve user satisfaction, vehicle efficiency, and energy utilization. Another problem is effectively managing transport networks in urban areas (Tirachini, 2013), for instance how to pick up passengers more efficiently based on identifying demand for taxi services. This can be achieved by using intelligent approaches to predict hot spots relating to locations of where taxis pick up and set down people in an urban area over the course of the day based on historical and real-time geo-spatial data. Data collected on high and low predicted taxi demands over the urban area together with contextual information pertaining to traffic conditions, geospatial distribution of the fleet and vehicle telematics can then be used to provide recommendations to taxi operators for the distribution and optimization of taxi services. User behavior modelling can further be used to recommend real-time re-routings to satisfy personal objectives while relieving congestion. The problem of optimally managing the distribution of taxi services can also be tackled at large transportation hubs such as railway stations and airports to meet passenger demands. For example, an airport Taxi stand passenger queue tracking system can be implemented from real time CCTV camera feeds and the application of vision processing algorithms for identifying and counting individuals waiting in a queue to estimate the number of people entering/exiting and queuing throughput over time. The system can be used to measure length, growth rate and predict the wait time for each queue, which can be visualized in real-time and used to send notifications / alerts based on operator triggers and thresholds. Our ongoing work is focused on optimizing taxi fleet distribution and routing in context of urban traffic conditions in order to enhance availability, reduce waiting and journey times, and promote fuel economy. In order to achieve the research objectives a novel deep learning based spatial modeling technique was developed and applied which was able to predict hot spots relating to locations of where taxis pick up and set down people in an urban area over the course of the day. The structure and ideas of the computational modelling approach is described in detail in section 4. The data used to train the predictive model were acquired from NYC Open Data webpage. This data include the 2013 Green taxi trip data which contain trip records from all trips completed in green taxis in NYC in 2013. The data records include fields such as capturing pick-up and drop-off dates/times, pick-up and drop-off locations, trip distances, itemized fares, rate types, payment types, and driver-reported passenger counts. The data used were collected and provided to the NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission (TLC) by technology providers authorized under the Livery Passenger Enhancement Program (LPEP). An example data sample can be seen in figure 8. The proposed model was utilized in the development of a commercial software application, and achieved above 95% prediction accuracy. Field  Value pick up_datetime 12/06/2013 12:11:05 PM dropoff_datetime 12/06/2013 12:14:06 PM store_and_fwd_flag  N rate_code 1 Dropoff_latitute 40.811981201171875 Passenger_count 1 Trip_distance 0.5 Fare_amount 4 Extra 0 MTA_tax 0.5 Tip_amount 0 Tolls_amount 0 Ehail_fee  Total_amount 4.5 Payment_type 2 Trip_type  Pickup_longitude ‐73.9650650024414 Pickup_latitude 40.8061408996582 Dropoff_longitude ‐73.962234497707031 Ven 4.3 SAnotanalyautom2008command AmoBig compstudelearnmodthis havebe nenvir2012 In orhummedichallpowinto largestatemeanthe rthousentein orand tan IEspellNLQdor_id Social networther interestinysis. Sentimematically iden8). Modern Fments, and stacan be utilizeong the variouData analyticputer assistedent's wellbeinning process dification of thapproach can e highlighted notably improronments can2). rder to contribman-computer ia posts and lenges relatederful semantica concept relae vocabulary, e. Upon enterning of its comresulting querusands of ‘corpence for examrder to find outhe natural lanEEE-endorsedling correctionQ CaptureNatural language queryrk sentiment ng applicationent analysis antify the user'Facebook andatus updates. ed towards crus contexts in cs can be appd learning envng (Karyotis, can provide he pedagogy ube found in tthat by incorpoved (Tan, 20n be found in tFigure bute to the gointeraction plreveal the rd to the procc, syntactic, aated to the usewhich can being the post amponents to dry they are likpora’ (texts), wmple). Then, a ut which tablenguage query.d algorithm, an. A high-levData LayerExtract structuraldatabase informatioFiguanalysis n field, whichaims at facilis evaluations d Twitter useThese data arereating very iwhich social plied towards vironments in2017). Undeguidelines toutilized in ordethe work by Tporating infor011). Recent ethe works by 10. A high-levoals and objeclatform for narecipient's secessing of unand synonym er's sentimente used to descras a natural ldetermine whakely to occupywhich are specomplete, up-es, columns, s. This is done analysing the el diagram ofrnInput Perforuse W1  ure 8. Data sam h can largely bitating the prand feelings ters generate hre very rich sointeresting annetwork sentsentiment ann order to enerstanding thetowards succeder to deliver tTan et al. The rmation from examples in tOrtigosa et avel diagram octives of sociaatural languagentiment. Socnstructured anmapper able t. This concepribe effectivellanguage querat part of speey. It achieves ecifically label-to-date schemsubjects etc. th in a variety oactual meanf the parsing pLayerrm NLP and   WordNetTmple. benefit from Brocessing of towards specihuge amountources of emotnd beneficial siment analysinalysis purposnhance the leae student's feeessful adaptatthis material. Eresults from tsocial networthe field of sal. (Ortigosa, 2of the parsing pal network senge processing cial media pond natural texto translate thpt is a word prly the user's sery, the propoech they each this by using led, for the pama is extractedhe query mayof ways, like ming of the quprocess is shoData Trasformation LayerPerfrom template query match and similarity analysisMachine Readable DataBig Data resehigh volumefic products ats of data thrtional and cogsentiment anas can be beneses on users arning experielings and atttion of the tEvidence of ththe team's exprks, sentimentsentiment ana2014) and Maprocess. ntiment analyswhich can beosts are subjxt. Therefore, he text from resent in a datentiment and sed system pabelong to, anda trained moarts of speech d from the daty be present bomachine semauery, synonymown in figure Modelling LayModelling anoptimisatioearch, is sentie data in ordand services (Prough their pgnitive informalysis applicateficial is educaof e-learningience and protitude towardtaught materithe effectiveneperimental sest classificationalysis in e-leaartin et al. (Msis we develope applied to sect to demanwe construcsocial media tabase containcognitive affearses the semd thus what podel of hundretokens (wordtabase in real-oth in the datantic analysis m substitution10. Followingyernd onApplicatSQL Qiment der to Pang, posts, mation tions. ation. g, and omote ds the ial or ess of ssions n can arning Martin, ped a social nding ted a posts ning a ective mantic art of eds of ds in a -time, abase using n, and g this tion LayerQuery Output Figure 9. Taxi demannd prediction application innterface. process, the analysis engine builds a complex relational graph to determine the various relationships between identified parts of the query, including complex, multi-table relationships, from which an SQL query is constructed, once all required relationships are identified. Gaining an insight of the user’s/client’s affective state, through the utilization of social media data, can fuel the generation and diversity of intelligent mechanisms able to deliver affective feedback in a wide spectrum of application areas. This feedback could extend from the digital to the physical world, by using standard hardware devices (e.g. smart phones, home appliances, lighting) in the context of intelligent environments. Intelligent cars could modify their engine and cabin configuration to meet their driver’s needs and preferences. E-learning systems could provide tailored learning material and tailored encouragements to the students. Automated manufacturing systems could take into account the client’s sentiment when designing and developing new products, in order to better satisfy their customer’s needs. Tele-home healthcare, robot companions, patient monitoring could be enriched by taking into account the patient’s context, behaviors and emtions in order to deliver more efficient patient specific services. Homes with the ability to modify their environment (lighting, temperature etc.) in order to suit their resident’s mood. 5. Conclusions In this paper, we have discussed the importance of big data analytics and computational intelligence techniques. We provided a comprehensive survey of computational intelligence techniques appropriate for the effective processing and analysis of big data. We have presented a data modelling methodology, which introduces a novel biologically inspired universal generative modelling approach called Hierarchical Spatial-Temporal State Machine (HSTSM). We investigated the benefits arising from the utilization of computational techniques namely deep learning neural networks, evolutionary algorithms, and fuzzy logic in Big Data analytics. We identified and highlighted potential novel real life CPS applications arising from the vast amount of information on offer by modern high tech societies, the deployment of intelligent computational techniques, and state of the art solutions to address challenges in these application areas. In this work, a novel approach for Big Data modelling is presented. The proposed methodology relies on a hybrid method, which is based on the structure and functions of the mammalian brain. It incorporates different soft computing techniques and it has the potential to deal with large amounts of data, which are characterized by spatial-temporal correlations. This approach can tackle the high requirements and maximize the potential of dealing with Big Data and therefore can be considered as a state of the art tool for Big Data analytics. The potential benefits arising from this research are numerous and span over a large spectrum of application areas. Utilizing this novel methodology to exploit Big Data's potential can lead to applications with significant impact to knowledge, society, economy, and individuals. Scientific knowledge and research may benefit from revealing hidden patterns in Big Data or by delivering Big Data analysis results in ways, which can be easily visualized and interpreted. Society could profit from the delivery of applications, which promote improved public transportations and health services. E-businesses and organizations could also be assisted through sentiment analysis tools, which contribute at the delivery of products and services which meet their customers' needs. Finally, an individual may benefit through the development of personalized and contextualized products and services, which are able to account effectively for complex related notions, such as their cognitive/affective state. Future work will involve the utilization of the proposed methodology to different application areas in order to create novel models and applications with significant commercial and scientific value and the further improvement of the developed systems.  References 1. Ahmed, S. H., Kim, G., & Kim, D. (2013, November). Cyber Physical System: Architecture, applications and research challenges. In Wireless Days (WD), 2013 IFIP (pp. 1-5). IEEE. 2. Alhabashneh, O., Iqbal, R., Doctor, F., & James, A. (2017). Fuzzy Rule Based Profiling Approach For Enterprise Information Seeking and Retrieval. Information Sciences, 394–395, July 2017, 18-37. 3. Alsheikh, M. A., Niyato, D., Lin, S., Tan, H. P., & Han, Z. (2016). Mobile Big Data Analytics Using Deep Learning and Apache Spark. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07031 4. Baheti, R., & Gill, H. (2011). Cyber-physical systems. The impact of control technology, 12, 161-166. 5. Behadada, O., Trovati, M., Chikh, M. A., & Bessis, N. (2015). Big data‐based extraction of fuzzy partition rules for heart arrhythmia detection: a semi‐automated approach. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience. 6. Bekkerman, R., Bilenko, M., & Langford, J. (Eds.). (2011). Scaling up machine learning: Parallel and distributed approaches. Cambridge University Press. 7. Bengio, Y. Learning Deep Architectures for AI. Foundations Trends Machine Learning, vol. 2 (1). 8. Besselink, B., Turri, V., van de Hoef, S. H., Liang, K. Y., Alam, A., Mårtensson, J., & Johansson, K. H. (2016). Cyber–physical control of road freight transport. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(5), 1128-1141. 9. Bhattacharya, M., Islam, R., & Abawajy, J. (2016). Evolutionary optimization: a big data perspective. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 59, 416-426. 10. Bing, L., & Chan, K. C. (2014, December). A Fuzzy Logic Approach for Opinion Mining on Large Scale Twitter Data. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE/ACM 7th International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing (pp. 652-657). IEEE Computer Society.  11. Campo, I., Finker, R., Martinez, M., Echanobe, J., & Doctor, F. (2014, July). A real-time driver identification system based on artificial neural networks and cepstral analysis. In Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2014 International Joint Conference on (pp. 1848-1855). IEEE. 12. Chang, V., Kuo, Y. H., & Ramachandran, M. (2016). Cloud computing adoption framework: A security framework for business clouds. Future Generation Computer Systems, 57, 24-41. 13. Chang, V., & Wills, G. (2016b). A model to compare cloud and non-cloud storage of Big Data. Future Generation Computer Systems, 57, 56-76. 14. Chang, V. (2015,a). Towards a Big Data system disaster recovery in a Private Cloud. Ad Hoc Networks, 35, 65-82. 15. Chang, V. (2015b). A proposed framework for Cloud Computing adoption. International Journal of Web Services Research. 16. Chen, C., Liu, X., Qiu, T., & Sangaiah, A. K. (2017). A short-term traffic prediction model in the vehicular cyber–physical systems. Future Generation Computer Systems. 17. Chen, X. W., & Lin, X. (2014). Big data deep learning: challenges and perspectives. Access, IEEE, 2, 514-525. 18. Chung, I. H., Sainath, T. N., Ramabhadran, B., Pichen, M., Gunnels, J., Austel, V., ... & Kingsbury, B. (2014, November). Parallel deep neural network training for big data on blue gene/q. In High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC14: International Conference for (pp. 745-753). IEEE. 19. Djahel, S., Jabeur, N., Barrett, R., & Murphy, J. (2015, May). Toward V2I communication technology-based solution for reducing road traffic congestion in smart cities. In Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC), 2015 International Symposium on (pp. 1-6). IEEE. 20. F. Doctor and R. Iqbal “An intelligent framework for monitoring student performance using fuzzy rule-based linguistic summarisation,” In H. Abbass, D. Essam and R. Sarker, Eds., Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), IEEE International Conference on. 10-15 June 2012, pp. 1-8. 21. F.Doctor, H. Hagras, V. Callaghan, ‘A Fuzzy Embedded Agent-Based Approach for Realizing Ambient Intelligence in Intelligent Inhabited Environments,” IEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernatics- Part A: Systems and Humans, vol. 35, no. 1, January 2005, pp. 55-56. 22. Doctor, F., Syue, C. H., Liu, Y. X., Shieh, J. S., & Iqbal, R. (2016). Type-2 fuzzy sets applied to multivariable self-organizing fuzzy logic controllers for regulating anesthesia. Applied Soft Computing, 38, 872-889. 23. Doctor, F., Iqbal, R., & Naguib, R. N. (2014). A fuzzy ambient intelligent agents approach for monitoring disease progression of dementia patients. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 5(1), 147-158. 24. Doctor, F., & Hagras, H. (2013). U.S. Patent No. 8,515,884. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 25. Dreier, F. (2002). Genetic Algorithm Tutorial.. 26. Duggal, R., Khatri, S. K., & Shukla, B. (2015, September). Improving patient matching: Single patient view for Clinical Decision Support using Big Data analytics. In Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (ICRITO)(Trends and Future Directions), 2015 4th International Conference on (pp. 1-6). IEEE. 27. C. Eaton, D. Deroos, T. Deutsch, G. Lapis and P.C. Zikopoulos, Understanding Big Data: Analytics for Enterprise Class Hadoop and Streaming Data, Mc Graw-Hill Companies, 978-0-07-179053-6, 2012 28. Free, C., Phillips, G., Watson, L., Galli, L., Felix, L., Edwards, P., ... & Haines, A. (2013). The effectiveness of mobile-health technologies to improve health care service delivery processes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med, 10(1), e1001363. 29. B.Gerhardt, K. Griffin and R. Klemann, "Unlocking Value in the Fragmented World of Big Data Analytics", Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group, June 2012,http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/sp/Information-Infomediaries.pdf 30. Gurney, K. (1997) An introduction to neural networks. London: UCL press 31. Harding, C., Ilves, P., & Wilson, S. (2015). Digital mental health services in general practice. Br J Gen Pract, 65(631), 58-59. 32. Hashem, I. A. T., Yaqoob, I., Anuar, N. B., Mokhtar, S., Gani, A., & Khan, S. U. (2015). The rise of “big data” on cloud computing: Review and open research issues. Information Systems, 47, 98-115.  33. Hashem, I. A. T., Chang, V., Anuar, N. B., Adewole, K., Yaqoob, I., Gani, A., ... & Chiroma, H. (2016). The role of big data in smart city. International Journal of Information Management, 36(5), 748-758. 34. Haykin, S. S., Haykin, S. S., Haykin, S. S., & Haykin, S. S. (2009). Neural networks and learning machines (Vol. 3). Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education. 35. Hawkins, J. 2004, On intelligence, Times Books, New York. 36. Hawkins, J. & George, D. (2006), Hierarchical Temporal Memory: Concepts, Theory, and Terminology. 37. Hawkins, J. George, D. Niemasik, J. (2009), Sequence memory for prediction, inference and behavior, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Published 30 March 2009.DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0322 38. Hinton, G. E., & Salakhutdinov, R. R. (2006). Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. Science, 313(5786), 504-507. 39. Hinton, G., Deng, L., Yu, D., Dahl, G. E., Mohamed, A. R., Jaitly, N., ... & Kingsbury, B. (2012). Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups. Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, 29(6), 82-97. 40. Hirsch, D. D. (2013). Glass House Effect: Big Data, the New Oil, and the Power of Analogy, The. Me. L. Rev., 66, 373. 41. Hossain, M. S. (2017). Cloud-supported cyber–physical localization framework for patients monitoring. IEEE Systems Journal, 11(1), 118-127. 42. Iqbal, R., Grzywaczewski, A., Halloran, J., Doctor F., Iqbal, K., (2015): “Design implications for task-specific search utilities for retrieval and reengineering of code”, Enterprise Information Systems, Taylor and Francis, pp 1751-7575. doi: 10.1080/17517575.2015.1086494 43. Iqbal, K, Odetayo M. James, A., Iqbal, R., Kumar, N., Bama S.,(2015): “An efficient image retrieval scheme for colour enhancement of embedded and distributed surveillance images”, Journal of Neurocomputing, Vol 174, Part 2, pp. 413-430 44. Iqbal, R., Shah, N., James, A., & Duursma, J. (2011). ARREST: From work practices to redesign for usability. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(2), 1182-1192. 45. Iqbal, R., Shah, N., James, A., & Cichowicz, T. (2013). Integration, optimization and usability of enterprise applications. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 36(6), 1480-1488. 46. Kaisler, S., Armour, F., Espinosa, J. A., & Money, W. (2013, January). Big data: Issues and challenges moving forward. In System Sciences (HICSS), 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on (pp. 995-1004). IEEE. 47. Kang, C.C., Chuang, Y.J., Tung, K.C., Chao, C.C., Tang, C.Y., Peng, S.C., and Wong, D.S.H. (2011) 'A genetic algorithm-based boolean delay model of intracellular signal transduction in inflammation'. BMC bioinformatics 12(1), S17 48. Karyotis, C., Doctor, F., Iqbal, R., James, A., & Chang, V. (2017). A fuzzy computational model of emotion for cloud based sentiment analysis. Journal of Information Sciences. 49. Karyotis, C., Doctor, F., Iqbal, R., James, A., & Chang, V. (2016). A Fuzzy Modelling Approach of Emotion for Affective Computing Systems. 50. Karyotis, C., Doctor, F., Iqbal, R., and James, A. (2015) An Intelligent Framework for Monitoring Students Affective Trajectories Using Adaptive Fuzzy Systems. IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, 2-5 August 2015, Istanbul, Turkey 51. Kattan, A., Doctor, F., & Arif, M. (2015, October). Two Brains Guided Interactive Evolution. In Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), 2015 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 3203-3208). IEEE. 52. Kissick, W. L. (1994). Medicine's dilemmas: infinite needs versus finite resources. Yale University Press. 53. Korekado, K., Morie, T., Nomura, O., Ando, H., Nakano, T., Matsugu, M., & Iwata, A. (2003, September). A convolutional neural network VLSI for image recognition using merged/mixed analog-digital architecture. In Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems (pp. 169-176). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 54. http://www.landrover.com/experiences/news/self-driving-car.html. As accessed online on 24 May 2016. 55. Le, Q. V. (2013, May). Building high-level features using large scale unsupervised learning. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 8595-8598). IEEE. 56. Lin, K. C., Zhang, K. Y., Huang, Y. H., Hung, J. C., & Yen, N. (2016). Feature selection based on an improved cat swarm optimization algorithm for big data classification. The Journal of Supercomputing, 1-12. 57. Liu, Y. X., Doctor, F., Fan, S. Z., & Shieh, J. S. (2014). Performance Analysis of Extracted Rule-Base Multivariable Type-2 Self-Organizing Fuzzy Logic Controller Applied to Anesthesia. BioMed research international, 2014. 58. Lu, S., Li, R. M., Tjhi, W. C., Lee, K. K., Wang, L., Li, X., & Ma, D. (2011, November). A framework for cloud-based large-scale data analytics and visualization: Case study on multiscale climate data. In Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on (pp. 618-622). IEEE. 59. Lv, Y., Duan, Y., Kang, W., Li, Z., & Wang, F. Y. (2015). Traffic flow prediction with big data: A deep learning approach. Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 16(2), 865-873. 60. Mahmud, S., Iqbal, R., & Doctor, F. (2016). Cloud enabled data analytics and visualization framework for health-shocks prediction. Future Generation Computer Systems. 61. Maniak, T., Iqbal, R., Doctor, F. (2016): “A Method for Monitoring the Operational State of a System”, Interactive Coventry Ltd Pending Patent Reference No: 1607820.6 62. Maniak, T., Iqbal, R., Doctor F., Jayne, C., (2013): “Automated Sound Signalling Device Quality Assurance Tool For Embedded Industrial Control Applications”, Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC),     pp., 4812-4818. 63. Maniak, T., Jayne, C., Iqbal, R., & Doctor, F. (2015). Automated intelligent system for sound signalling device quality assurance. Information Sciences,294, 600-611. 64. Martin, J. M., Ortigosa, A., & Carro, R. M. (2012, October). SentBuk: Sentiment analysis for e-learning environments. In Computers in Education (SIIE), 2012 International Symposium on (pp. 1-6). IEEE. 65. Mendel, J. M. (2001). Uncertain rule-based fuzzy logic systems: introduction and new directions. 66. Murdoch, T. B., & Detsky, A. S. (2013). The inevitable application of big data to health care. Jama, 309(13), 1351-1352. 67. A., Ortigosa, J. M., Martín and R. M. Carro. (2014). Sentiment analysis in Facebook and its application to e-learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 31, 527-541. 68. Pang, Z., Zheng, L., Tian, J., Kao-Walter, S., Dubrova, E., & Chen, Q. (2015). Design of a terminal solution for integration of in-home health care devices and services towards the Internet-of-Things. Enterprise Information Systems, 9(1), 86-116. 69. B. Pang and L. Lee. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 2(1-2):1–135, 1 2008. 70. Parpinelli, R. S., & Lopes, H. S. (2011). New inspirations in swarm intelligence: a survey. International Journal of Bio-Inspired Computation, 3(1), 1-16. 71. Poli, R., Langdon, W. B., McPhee, N. F., & Koza, J. R. (2008). A field guide to genetic programming. 72. Qureshi, F. F., Iqbal, R., & Asghar, M. N. (2017). Energy Efficient Wireless Communication Technique Based on Cognitive Radio for Internet of Things. Journal of Network and Computer Applications. 73. Razavi, S. H., Ebadati, E. O. M., Asadi, S., & Kaur, H. (2015). An efficient grouping genetic algorithm for data clustering and big data analysis. In Computational Intelligence for Big Data Analysis (pp. 119-142). Springer International Publishing.  74. Sagiroglu, S., & Sinanc, D. (2013, May). Big data: A review. In Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS), 2013 International Conference on (pp. 42-47). IEEE. 75. Sultan, N. (2014). Making use of cloud computing for healthcare provision: Opportunities and challenges. International Journal of Information Management,34(2), 177-184. 76. Sun, J., Zhang, Q., & Tsang, E. P. (2005). DE/EDA: A new evolutionary algorithm for global optimization. Information Sciences, 169(3), 249-262. 77. Suthaharan, S. (2014). Big data classification: Problems and challenges in network intrusion prediction with machine learning. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, 41(4), 70-73. 78. Tan, C., Lee, L., Tang, J., Jiang, L., Zhou, M., & Li, P. (2011, August). User-level sentiment analysis incorporating social networks. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 1397-1405). ACM. 79. Tirachini, A. (2013). Estimation of travel time and the benefits of upgrading the fare payment technology in urban bus services. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 30, 239-256. 80. Tolk, A. (2015, July). The next generation of modeling & simulation: integrating big data and deep learning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Summer Computer Simulation (pp. 1-8). Society for Computer Simulation International. 81. Vegni, A. M., Biagi, M., & Cusani, R. (2013). Smart vehicles, technologies and main applications in vehicular ad hoc networks. INTECH Open Access Publisher. 82. Villars, R. L., Olofson, C. W., & Eastwood, M. (2011). Big data: What it is and why you should care. White Paper, IDC. 83. Wan, J., Zhang, D., Zhao, S., Yang, L., & Lloret, J. (2014). Context-aware vehicular cyber-physical systems with cloud support: architecture, challenges, and solutions. IEEE Communications Magazine, 52(8), 106-113. 84. Wang, J., Abid, H., Lee, S., Shu, L., & Xia, F. (2011). A secured health care application architecture for cyber-physical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1201.0213. 85. Whitley, D. (2001). An overview of evolutionary algorithms: practical issues and common pitfalls. Information and software technology, 43(14), 817-831. 86. D. Wu, Using Physiological Signals: Virtual Reality Stroop Task, IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing vol. 1, no. 2, (2010), pp. 109–118. 87. D. Wu, “Fuzzy sets and systems in building closed-loop affective computing systems for human-computer interaction: Advances and new directions,” IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence, Brisbane, Australia, June 10-15, 2012. 88. Yaqoob, I., Chang, V., Gani, A., Mokhtar, S., Hashem, I. A. T., Ahmed, E., ... & Khan, S. U. (2016). Information fusion in social big data: Foundations, state-of-the-art, applications, challenges, and future research directions. International Journal of Information Management. 89. Zadeh, L.A. (1965). ‘Fuzzy sets’. Information and Control 8 (3): 338–353 90. Zaidi, N. A., Webb, G. I., Carman, M. J., & Petitjean, F. (2015). Deep broad learning-Big models for Big data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.01346 91. Zhang, Y., Qiu, M., Tsai, C. W., Hassan, M. M., & Alamri, A. (2017). Health-CPS: Healthcare cyber-physical system assisted by cloud and big data. IEEE Systems Journal, 11(1), 88-95. . Big DProfiDr Rahathe Facurecord oand locaproject mLoop) atproject ifor persoprojects,Fault DeconferenconferenIqbal haRetrieva Dr FaiyaFaculty industryproblemDecision2011, LoData Anwo/2009(MexicoData Ailes  at Iqbal is Maulty of Enginof project maal industries (managementt the Technicin collaborationalisation o, in Intelligenetection. He nces and wornces and woras also editedal and User Saz Doctor is of Engineeriy and academms related to sn Support. Hord Stafford nalysis and D9/141631. Heo), the TSB innalyticsanaging Direneering, Envianagement an(e.g. Jaguar Lt and developcal Universition with Jaguof telematics nt Systems, Phas publisherkshops. Dr Irkshops. He id several specSupportive sy Research Diing, Environmmia to developsmart enviroHis work has award for InDecision-Make has led andn collaboratis: compand appector of Interironment andnd leadershipLand Rover pment of the ty of Eindhovuar Land Roand optimisaPredictive Med more than Iqbal is on this also a fellocial issues ofystems. irector of Intement and Cop Novel Comnments, Eneresulted in hnnovation) anking using Hd co-led projeion with locaputationplicatio ractive Covend Computingp of industriaLtd, Trinity EU FP7 projven , Netherlover on self-lation of routModelling, Us100 papers ihe programmow of the UKf internationaeractive Covomputing at Cmputational Iergy Optimishigh profile innd an internaHybrid Neuroects funded tal industry (enal intelon areasntry Ltd andg at Coventryal projects fuExpert Systeoject CHIL (Clands. Recenearning car fe planning. Hser Behaviouin peer-revieme committeeK Higher Edual journals wventry Ltd anCoventry UnIntelligence Sation, Predicnnovation awational patento-Fuzzy and Tthrough the Ne.g. Jaguar Lalligences a Reader/Asy University. nded by EPSems Ltd). HeComputers inntly, he has sufor predictingHe has manaur, Informatioewed journale of several inucation Acadwithin the fielnd a Senior Lniversity. He Solutions addctive Analyticwards (best Kt on improveType-2 FuzzNewton Fundand Rover Le technissociate Prof He has a traSRC, TSB, Ee was involven Human Intuccessfully lg driver’s beaged many inon Retrieval ls and reputabinternational demy (HEA)ld of InformaLecturer in thhas worked dressing realics and CollaKTP regionaled approachezy Systems: d and ConacLtd) and thouiques fessor in ack ERDF ed in the eraction led a ehaviour ndustrial and ble ). Dr ation he in l world aborative l finalist es for yt gh collaborDoctor hworkshoconferenIEEE an Dr Brian(IP) andIntellectcommerdesigns inventorcompaniin the IPpeer revBNFL's advisorywas Chaassessmprojects Dr Shah31 yearsof the GTelecomFellow, Council philanthPlanetarHospitalGlobalstrative consulthas publishedops. He regulnces and wornd IEEE Comn More is repd serves on thtual Propertyrcialisation oand copyrighr on 6 patentsies using IP P arena and dviewed paperCompany Ry panels. He airman of theent of develoas commerc hid Mahmud s of professioGovernment om and IT poliGlobal Thinof the Natiohropic activitiry Society, Tl. He has beetar (Pvt) Limtancy with ind over 50 paplarly serves orkshops in thmputational I presenting Che Board of Dy at Coventryf all forms oht. He has has and jointly and attractindeveloped acrs on researchResearch Labsits on the Be Steering Gropment propcialisation cois Chairmanonal experienof Pakistan aicies. Dr Mahnk Tank Netwonal Universiies, workingTRUCE, Beguen the foundemited, SHOAnternational ppers in peer ron organisatihe field of CoIntelligence Soventry UnivDirectors of Iy University wf IP. He manad 25 years eowns 3 tradng investmencredited couh, innovationoratory. He iBoard of Trusroup to the Inosals in the fonsultant. n and Chief Ence in the fieddressing thehmud is 2016work (GTTNity of Scienc with youth-um Mehmooer director anA (Pvt) Limitepartners (e.greviewed intion and progomputationalSociety. versity EnterInteractive Cwith responsnages a portfexperience wde marks. Dr nt into them. urses for acadn and entrepris a Director stees of the Institute. He hfield of NanoExecutive Ofeld of ICT. He formulation6 DistinguishN) and Co Che and Techn-oriented andoda Welfare Tnd shareholded, and Shahg. Ministry ofternational jogramme comml Intelligencerprise Ltd as Coventry Ltdsibility for pofolio of 20 paworking with More has beHe is passiondemic and inreneurship. Hof 2 compannstitute of Nhas worked fotechnology fficer of InterHe has servedn and implemhed Eisenhowhair for ICT oology (NUSd communityTrust and Zuder of Paktel heen Pay TV f Labour, Sauournals, confmittees of see. He is also Director of I. He works aolicy, protectatent familiesIntellectual Peen active in nate about eddustry use. HHe worked atnies and sits Nanotechnolofor private coand worked ractive Groupd on various fmentation of wer Fellow. on the CorpoT). He is actservice projubaida KhaliqLimited, Ind(Pvt) Limiteudi Arabia). ferences and everal internaa member ofIntellectual Pas Director fotion, valuatios, trademarkProperty, is starting 15 ducation andHe has publist CEA, NPL on 3 nationaogy prior to wontractors onon EU Framp. He has mofederal commf the NationaHe is also a orate Advisortive in severajects such as q Memorial dus Vision, Ped. He has alDr ational f the Property or on and ks, an d training shed 20 and al which he n mework ore than mittees al Senior ry al Buraq Free Pak lso served acareer in12th Ter Mr. Usminclude dpartnershProject MArchitecmanagemcareer. Hrole in bSociety Pakistanas a Director n promoting radata Nation man Yousuf ideveloping ahips and alliManagementcture Framewment and negHe has workebusiness deve(www.buraqn’s youth. Heof Askari BaIT in Pakistanal IT Excellis Chief Execand implemeances, and dt Professionawork 9 (TOGgotiation anded with the Uelopment at aqsociety.org)e has lived inank for over an, Dr Mahmlence Awardcutive Officeenting businedirecting techal (PMP), he GAF 9 Level d attended nuUnited Nationa regional IT as Vice Chan the UAE fosix years. Inmud was giveds for 2014.er UAE at Iness strategy fhnical and prois also certif2). He has cumerous worns Office forT firm. He is airman and vor over 12 yen recognitionen the Lifetimnteractive Grfor the Middloject teams. fied in logistcompleted trarkshops and tr Project Seractively invovolunteers hisears and is flufor having sme Achievemoup. His primle East operaIn addition ttics and The aining in Stratrainings ovevices (UNOPolved with ths time for theuent in Englispent his entiment Award:mary responsation, forgingto being a ceOpen Groupategic visioner the coursePS) in his prhe Buraq Plae developmeish, Urdu andire at the sibilities g key rtified p ing, time e of his revious anetary ent of d Arabic. Big Data Analytics: computational intelligence techniques and application areas  Highlights 1. We highlighted the importance of Big Data in modern life and economy. 2. We investigated the benefits of computational intelligence techniques namely deep learning neural networks, evolutionary algorithms and fuzzy logic in big data analytics. 3. We presented a novel data modelling methodology which introduces a novel biologically inspired universal generative modelling approach called Hierarchical Spatial‐Temporal State Machine (HSTSM). 4. We explored the potential of the powerful combination of Big Data and Computational intelligence and identified a number of areas where novel applications in real world problems can be developed.  5. We have also discussed various aspects of policy, protection, valuation and commercialization related to big data.   