bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphCausal feature selection using a knowledge graph combining structuredknowledge from the biomedical literature and ontologies: a use casestudying depression as a risk factor for Alzheimer’s diseaseScott A. Malec, PhD,1 Sanya B. Taneja, MS,2 Steven M. Albert, PhD, MS,3C. Elizabeth Shaaban, PhD, MS, MPH,4 Helmet T. Karim, PhD,5,6 Arthur S. Levine, MD,7,8Paul Munro, PhD,9 Tiffany J. Callahan, PhD, MPH,10 Richard D. Boyce, PhD 1,21Department of Biomedical Informatics, School of Medicine; 2Intelligent Systems Program;3Department of Behavioral and Community Health Sciences, School of Public Health,4Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health; 5Department of Psychiatry; 6Department ofBioengineering; 7Department of Neurobiology, School of Medicine;8The Brain Institute, School of Medicine; 9School of Computing and Information;University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA USA10Department of Biomedical informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY USAHighlights● Knowledge of causal variables and their roles is essential for causal inference.● We show how to search a knowledge graph (KG) for causal variables and their roles.● The KG combines literature-derived knowledge with ontology-grounded knowledge.● We design queries to search the KG for confounder, collider, and mediator roles.● KG search reveals variables in these roles for depression and Alzheimer’s disease.Graphical abstract:1bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphAbstractBackground: Causal feature selection is essential for estimating effects from observational data. Identifyingconfounders is a crucial step in this process. Traditionally, researchers employ content-matter expertise andliterature review to identify confounders. Uncontrolled confounding from unidentified confounders threatensvalidity, conditioning on intermediate variables (mediators) weakens estimates, and conditioning on common effects(colliders) induces bias. Additionally, without special treatment, erroneous conditioning on variables combiningroles introduces bias. However, the vast literature is growing exponentially, making it infeasible to assimilate thisknowledge. To address these challenges, we introduce a novel knowledge graph (KG) application enabling causalfeature selection by combining computable literature-derived knowledge with biomedical ontologies. We present ause case of our approach specifying a causal model for estimating the total causal effect of depression on the risk ofdeveloping Alzheimer’s disease (AD) from observational data.Methods: We extracted computable knowledge from a literature corpus using three machine reading systems andinferred missing knowledge using logical closure operations. Using a KG framework, we mapped the output totarget terminologies and combined it with ontology-grounded resources. We translated epidemiological definitionsof confounder, collider, and mediator into queries for searching the KG and summarized the roles played by theidentified variables. We compared the results with outputfrom a complementary method and publishedobservational studies and examined a selection of confounding and combined role variables in-depth.Results: Our search identified 128 confounders, including 58 phenotypes, 47 drugs, 35 genes, 23 collider, and 16mediator phenotypes. However, only 31 of the 58 confounder phenotypes were found to behave exclusively asconfounders, while the remaining 27 phenotypes played other roles. Obstructive sleep apnea emerged as a potentialnovel confounder for depression and AD. Anemia exemplified a variable playing combined roles.Conclusion: Our findings suggest combining machine reading and KG could augment human expertise for causalfeature selection. However, the complexity of causal feature selection for depression with AD highlights the need forstandardized field-specific databases of causal variables. Further work is needed to optimize KG search andtransform the output for human consumption.Keywords: knowledge representation, management, or engineering; knowledge graphs; causal modeling; featureselection; Alzheimer’s disease; depression1. IntroductionRandomized Controlled Trials (RCTs) are widely considered to be the paramount method for determiningthe causal relationship between exposure and outcome in the medical field1. The supremacy of RCTs is due to theefficacy of randomization in eliminating bias by eliminating the relationship between exposure assignment and thehealth characteristics of study participants that may impact the outcome. However, there are instances where RCTsare not feasible due to ethical or pragmatic reasons. For instance, studying the risk factors for chronic diseasesamong older adults through RCTs can be impractical, as RCTs typically require short durations and healthyparticipants. Additionally, the external validity of RCTs can be problematic, as it may not be possible to generalize2bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphconclusions from the study to the target population1. Therefore, study designs have been developed to address theselimitations to estimate the effects of non-randomized, observational data.However, confounding bias is common when estimating causal effects inobservational studies. Confounding bias occurs when a third unrelatedfactor is linked to both the exposure and the outcome of interest, distortingthe true causal effect of the exposure. Researchers can use methods likematching, stratification, restriction, or statistical adjustment to reduce oreliminate this bias. Thus, identifying variables sufficient to control forconfounding bias is essential to estimate the effects from observationaldata reliably2. This variable identification task, causal feature selection, isthe present study's focus.Fortunately, the causal inference literature has produced exacting causalcriteria to guide causal feature selection, i.e., to populate a causal model(often in a directed acyclic graph or DAG) 2–4. These causal criteriarecommend which variables to include in an adjustment set. First andforemost of these criteria is the Principle of the Common Cause or PCC,first expressed by philosopher of science Hans Reichenbach4. Essentially,the PCC requires the inclusion of all common causes (confounders) of the exposure and the outcome. More recently,more advanced alternative criteria have been proposed for mitigating scenarios with unmeasured confounders5.Nevertheless, applying these causal feature selection criteria to real-world problems depends on accurate, granularknowledge about etiological relationships relating an exposure to an outcome.Traditionally, the task of causal feature selection depends on prior knowledge of the subject matter throughliterature review, or expert consultation has fallen to human content-matter experts to identify and carefully selectvariables for which to control2,6,7 using a judicious mix of content-matter expertise, literature review, andguesswork8–11. However, the literature is vast (PubMed indexes over 1 million articles per year12), making this adifficult task for humans to carry out. Knowledge about the underlying causal structure is fragmentary and inconstant revision.3bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphThe roles (confounder, collider, and mediator) played by variables etiologically related to an exposure andan outcome are depicted in Figure 1.Figure 1. This causal diagram depicts exposure (A) and outcome (Y) in yellow and orange, respectively, along witha confounder denoted “X” with a green background, a mediator variable denoted “M” with a gray background, and acollider “C” also with a gray background. The green background for the confounder means that it is desirable tocondition on such variables. Gray indicates that conditioning on that type of variable induces bias.4bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphCausal variables do not always behave solely as confounders. For example, conventional regression-basedestimates fail under treatment confounder feedback13, in which confounders act simultaneously as intermediatevariables called mediators14–16. Conditioning on mediators is not recommended for estimating the total causal effectas mediators are on the causal path and tend to bias effect measures. Variables that act simultaneously asconfounders and mediators are also called confounders affected by prior treatment, or CAPTs17. CAPTs should notbe adjusted for unless estimation methods designed for this purpose are used.Additionally, variables called colliders, the common effects of the exposure and outcome, should not beused for conditioning because they induce collider bias that distorts measures of effect. By introducing non-causaldependency, collider bias can inflate a null effect into a positive or negative effect or reverse the direction of theeffect18. In a well-known example of collider bias, a strong association was detected between locomotor disease(exposure) and respiratory disease (outcome): odds ratio (OR) 4.09. In this case, collider-stratification bias resultedfrom looking only at hospitalized patients. When the data included a mix of hospitalized patients and the generalpopulation, this association was absent (OR 1.06)19. Thus, because variables may not act in well-defined categories,it is important to be aware of potentially ill-behaved covariates when selecting features so that variables withcomplex behavior can be dealt with optimally. In our Discussion, we address these and related issues in more depth.The inability to ensure comprehensive knowledge can mean that important confounders are not controlledfor20,21 while inappropriate variables are19,22–24. Fortunately, it may be possible to reduce confounding bias better andprevent inducing bias from the inappropriate selection of variables by considering a more comprehensive set ofpotential confounders using computational tools.Harnessing computable causal knowledge made accessible by machine reading could improve thecomprehensiveness of causal feature selection. Machine reading works by capturing concepts25, or units of meaningrepresenting specific biomedical entities or ideas in a text, e.g., diseases, symptoms, treatments, but also howdifferent concepts are related by automatically extracting knowledge from the biomedical literature insubject-predicate-object triples, also called semantic predications, e.g., “ibuprofen TREATS migraine.” Theseconcepts are then represented in standardized terminologies and ontologies that describe and communicatehealthcare-related information. There is substantial literature on workflows deploying triples from machine readingsystems in a broad range of biomedical applications from pharmacovigilance26–29, cancer research30,31, and drug5bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphrepositioning32,33. However, machine reading output has potential weaknesses. For instance, the recall of machinereading is low relative to other natural language processing tasks since machine reading systems often rely on overlyprecise manually-crafted patterns34. Furthermore, machine reading output may be incomplete. For instance, while amachine reading system may accurately detect the above predication, critical implied information may be missed.For example, as human semantic reasoners proficient in English, it may be possible to infer that therapeutic potentialextends to all NSAIDs, the broader category of drugs to which ibuprofen belongs, or that ibuprofen and the otherNSAIDs could also treat migraine. Other weaknesses include that machine reading systems can produce erroneousoutput that is unsuitable as is for downstream applications, e.g., causal feature selection35. We address thesechallenges further in the Discussion.Fortunately, biomedical ontologies contain authoritative, expert-curated representations of entities andrelationships between those entities that are exploitable by computer programs. Causal knowledge in theseontologies has been used to inform causal models in AD research36 and elsewhere37–41. This knowledge could beused to filter out erroneous assertions from machine reading by distilling those assertions through the ontologiescreated by domain experts. However, like the literature, biomedical ontologies are incomplete due to the extensivemanual effort to build and maintain them42.The computable literature-derived knowledge from the literature and ontology-grounded resources areoften consolidated into a knowledge graph (KG) representation. A KG is defined as a “graph-theoreticrepresentation of human knowledge such that it can be ingested with semantics by a machine43.”In biomedical KGs,entities such as disease phenotypes, genes, enzymes, ligands, and diseases are represented as nodes, while edges (orarrows) denote relationships (predicates) between the nodes. Certain KG implementations can employontology-grounded information to prune erroneous inputs and thus may partially overcome the limitations of relyingexclusively on structured information extracted from the literature.This paper introduces a novel causal feature selection method using a KG application combiningliterature-derived structured knowledge with the precise semantics of ontology-grounded resources. Our approachentails constructing and searching a large biomedical KG and provides a proof of concept in a use caseidentifying and refining a set of confounders for estimating the total causal effects of depression on Alzheimer’sdisease (AD).6bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphAD is the fourth most common cause of death for those 75 years of age or older44 and is a progressive,multifactorial neurodegenerative disease and the most common cause of dementia. Although most commonlyassociated with progressive memory loss, AD impacts cognitive ability across multiple domains 45, includingexecutive and language function, sleep, mood, and personality. Over time, it reduces a person’s autonomy and leadsto death. Despite AD’s significant and growing burden, major knowledge gaps remain in AD diagnosis, treatment,and prevention, and only two FDA-approved disease-modifying therapies exist (Iacanumab and Aducanumab).Depression is a common mental illness where the person focuses on negative emotions with symptoms ofrestlessness, inability to focus, irritability, fatigue, and suicidal thoughts, and may be accompanied by copingbehavior, e.g., overeating46,47.We chose to study the relationship between depression and AD as a use case for the following reasons.First, the two conditions are multifactorial and heterogeneous in nature48,48–50 and have overlapping clinicaldefinitions, common risk factors, and etiological mechanisms48–52. Hence, we expect the structure of the causalneighborhood of variables related to both depression and AD to be inherently challenging and complex. We wouldexpect to find variables that play multiple roles. Second, recent insights into the modifiable risk factors presentunprecedented opportunities for preventive interventions to reduce AD's disease burden dramatically. The LancetCommission on dementia identified depression among eleven other modifiable risk factors, reporting that 40% ofAD diagnoses are attributable to these modifiable risk factors53. Thus, if depression were truly an independent riskfactor, reducing the prevalence of depression could also reduce the population-level disease burden of AD.However, controversy surrounds depression as either an independent and modifiable risk factor or aprodrome of AD in late life, making depression an interesting condition to study. Lastly, depression is a highlyprevalent disorder. In 2018, it was the third most common mental illness; by 2030, it is expected to become thenumber one most prevalent mental illness47. The prevalence of depression has also been exacerbated by currentevents, including the COVID-19 pandemic54. Thus, if the relationship between depression and AD is genuinelycausal, intervening in depression could significantly impact public health. Taken together, the depression and ADrelationship is a good fit as a use case since the objective of our causal feature selection method could address acritical need to clarify the etiological status of depression for its effect on AD risk in future studies by furnishing amore comprehensive set of confounders.7bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphThis work aims to advance the state-of-the-art causal feature selection method that combinesliterature-derived structured knowledge with the precise semantics of ontology-grounded resources. The essentialidea of this study is to use information extracted from the literature to define the domain of discourse (here, the setof variables potentially related to depression and AD) and then filter out the variables based on biologicalplausibility using an ontology-grounded KG. We hypothesize that:● It is possible to identify plausible confounders, colliders, and mediators from structured knowledge distilledfrom the literature through an ontology-grounded KG (H1). Some of the variables identified by the KGsearch would also appear in the results of complementary methods and be reported in publishedobservational studies.● There is a high degree of complexity regarding the variables linking depression and AD because of thebi-directional nature of the relationship between depression and AD (H2). Hence, we expect manyvariables, including confounders, to play multiple causal roles.● The reasoning paths traversed searching the KG can produce reasonable hypotheses for the mechanismsunderlying the relationships between the variables and clarify their meaning (H3).In the next section, we describe the workflow for extracting and post-processing the structured knowledge from theliterature, constructing the KG, and reporting and evaluating the KG search results. Then, we report the KG searchresults and evaluation. Finally, we interpret these results in the context of our use case and clarify the strengths andweaknesses of the approach to inform future work.2. Methods and MaterialsFigure 2 shows the workflow for this study. We first delineated the scope of the corpus of articles inPubMed by their PubMed identifiers. Next, we extracted triples from the titles and abstracts from the articles in thecorpus using machine reading systems (SemRep55–57 along with EIDOS and REACH in the INDRA58 ecosystem)and combined and harmonized the outputs. We refer to the graph containing the outputs, i.e., the structuredknowledge derived from machine reading of the literature (and in the post-processing stages), as the extractiongraph. Next, since there may be information logically entailed by the extracted information, we appliedforward-chaining over the extracted triples to infer implied triples based on logical properties, e.g., transitivity,8bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphsymmetry, asymmetry, and reflexivity, of predicates extracted by machine reading. The terminology-mapped andlogically closed extraction graph was combined with an ontology-grounded KG constructed with the PheKnowLatorworkflow developed by Callahan et al.59–61. We then translated standard epidemiological criteria for confounders,colliders, and mediators into discovery patterns, which are semantic constraints over the relations betweenconcepts62. We implemented those discovery patterns as SPARQL queries for searching the KG based on ourprevious research63. We analyzed the KG search results for evaluation by compiling the variables by their simple andcombined roles and comparing these results with reported confounders from published observational studies that wemanually collected from a pilot meta-review and the output of a complementary method (searching the SemanticMEDLINE database, or SemMedDB64). Finally, we manually inspected a selection of variables by inspecting thesource sentences, interpreting explanatory reasoning paths produced by the search, and searching PubMed.We provide details for each component in the paragraphs below and document constructing the extractiongraph and KG search. The code we produced for this work is available on the Zenodo project repository,https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6785307. Documentation for how to use this code archive is available in Appendix Cin the Supplementary Materials.Figure 2. The principal stages of the workflow to construct the causal feature selection system. I. Scope theliterature to clinical studies investigating AD, published in 2010 or after. II. Obtain triples from the machine readingsystems. III. Post-process the knowledge by performing logical closure operations with the CLIPS production rulesystem65,66 to infer missing edges and terminology mapping. IV. Construct the KG using the PheKnowLatorplatform, merging the output of the machine reading systems with ontology-grounded information. V. Search the KGto identify relevant variables. VI. Compile the search results into a causal model analyzing KG search result outputand comparing that output with the structured knowledge in SemMedDB, the results of a pilot meta-review ofreported confounders collected from observational studies, and PubMed.9bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph2.1 Scoping the literatureWe consulted with a health sciences librarian to design a PubMed query (see File II. (Appendix_C.docx),Listing S1) to limit the indexed literature’s scope to human research related to AD-related associations and riskfactors. The idea is to ingest a significant fraction of the concepts in the AD domain while having a tractable dataset. We limited the search to 10 years before the search date (July 11, 2020) to a subset of the literature related solelyto AD. This is because different types of dementia may have different underlying etiological mechanisms and riskfactors.2.3 Obtaining triples from machine readingSemRep. SemRep is a natural language processing tool developed by the National Library of Medicine(NLM) for extracting semantic triples from biomedical literature55. SemRep uses a named entity recognition systemcalled MetaMap67–69. MetaMap transforms mentions of particular biomedical entities identified as components ofsemantic triples to “concepts” in the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) metathesaurus55. Each concept inthe UMLS metathesaurus is assigned a unique handle called a concept unique identifier or CUI. SemRep infersrelations between entities encountered in the biomedical text using a part-of-speech tagger and a semantic networkinformed by semantic constraints and outputs semantic triples. SemRep has been evaluated extensively over itsexistence (now almost two decades). Evaluations focusing on SemRep’s intrinsic ability to extract semantic triplesthat accord with human judgment have yielded 0.55-0.9 precision, 0.24-0.42 recall, and 0.38-0.5 F155. For moreextensive information on SemRep, see an overview of Semrep by Kilicoglu55.We used the triples present in the Semantic MEDLINE database, SemMedDB. We downloadedSemMedDB version 40 (on June 1st, 2020). We searched SemMedDB for the triples associated with the PubMedidentifiers resulting from the literature scoping query.10bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphINDRA. The Integrated Network and Dynamical Reasoning Assembler, or INDRA, is an automatedmachine reading and model assembly software. We use two machine reading systems developed within theecosystem, EIDOS and REACH. EIDOS is a rule-based open-domain machine reader that extracts causal andcorrelational relations between events mentioned in free-text70,71. EIDOS extracts three predicate types - EVENT,INFLUENCE, and ASSOCIATION. EVENT signifies a change or modification of a concept identified by the machinereader. INFLUENCE is a causal relationship between two events, while ASSOCIATION represents a set of events withoutimplying causality. REading and Assembling Contextual and Holistic mechanisms from text, or REACH, detectsmentions of protein-modifying biochemical processes called post-translational modifications in text. Massfluorescence spectroscopy has allowed for the precise characterization of different post-translational modificationsand opened the possibility of discovering novel biomarkers, therapeutic strategies, or drug targets involving proteininteractions. In addition, a burgeoning literature in AD research79–81 has revealed that many processes involvingproteins related to AD’s pathogenesis are related to perturbations to processes involving post-translationalmodifications. REACH provides a window into these processes. Table 1 lists the predicates detected by the machinereading systems we analyze in the paper.Table 1. This table displays the subset of predicates we analyze in this paper, organized by machine reading systemand semantic domain. These machine reading system predicates were chosen because they describe informationessential for causal feature selection and modeling.READERSemantic DomainsPredicatesSemRepClinical MedicineTREATS, PREVENTSMolecular InteractionsINTERACTS_WITH, INHIBITS, STIMULATESDisease EtiologyASSOCIATED_WITH, CAUSES, PRECEDES,PharmacogenomicsPREDISPOSESAFFECTS, AUGMENTS, COMPLICATES,DISRUPTS, INHIBITS, STIMULATESStatic RelationsPART_OF, COEXISTS_WITHINDRA/EIDOSGeneral DomainASSOCIATION, INFLUENCEINDRA/REACH Biochemical Reactions (involving covalentPHOSPHORYLATION, UBIQUITINATION,modification of a protein by attaching a functionalHYDROXYLATION, SUMOYLATION,group)GLYCOSYLATION, ACETYLATION,FARNESYLATION, RIBOSYLATION, METHYLATIONNested Events / “Regulations”REGULATES, PROMOTES, INHIBITS, ACTIVATES11bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph2.3 Knowledge post-processing2.3.1 Terminology mappingThe purpose of knowledge post-processing is to improve the accuracy and completeness of theliterature-derived knowledge. In this step, we use knowledge hygiene via terminology mapping and automatedreasoning to transform the output from machine reading into an extraction graph with inferred information fromapplying logic and with concepts mappable to an ontology-grounded KG. Knowledge hygiene is required to makethe machine reading output more amenable to inference. Knowledge hygiene addresses issues with the completenessand validity of the extracted data, including redundancy.We performed the following steps on the triples extracted by the machine reading systems. First, tripleswere removed with phrases in the subject or object position with more than three space-delimited tokens, e.g.,“alpha-blockers aggravation cognitive dementia patients,” from the corpus since these phrases could not becondensed to a single concept. Second, we filtered out irrelevant predicates, e.g., LOCATION_OF, and retained only thepredicates listed in Table 1. We also removed duplicate triples. Third, we assigned a default probabilistic belief scoreof 0.8 to all SemRep triples. The belief score is a value that represents the level of confidence we place in theaccuracy of the triple and ranges on a scale from 0 (no confidence) to 1.0 (certainty). The value of 0.8 was chosenbecause it is the average published performance characteristic across SemRep's various predicates64,75.Fourth, we mapped the REACH predicates to RO:0002436 MOLECULARLY_INTERACTS_WITH, except forphosphorylation, which was mapped to RO:0002447 PHOSPHORYLATES in the Relation Ontology (RO)76. We used thebuilt-in INDRA preassembly module to remove duplicate triples and assign belief scores for the extracted triplesfrom REACH and EIDOS with the INDRA belief module. From EIDOS, we included all unique INFLUENCE andASSOCIATION triples. We also mapped the biomedical entities appearing in the subject and object positions in theextracted INDRA triples to UMLS concepts using MetaMap67,68 (version 1.8 with UMLS version 2018AA) andobtained the CUI, UMLS preferred name, and semantic type for the top-scoring match from MetaMap for eachconcept. All triples were removed from the corpus used to create the extraction graph where the subject, predicate,or object did not have a corresponding mapping in UMLS. Lastly, the triples from all three readers were converted12bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphto tab-separated files in a combined corpus that included one row for each subject, predicate, object (with UMLSmapping information), belief score, source sentence, and PubMed ID of the original text and combined the machinereaders’ output into an extraction graph. The extraction graph contains only the literature-derived triples from eachof the readers.2.3.2 Logical closure over the extraction graphMachine reading systems typically do not consider logical entailment concerning the logical properties ofthe predicates they detect. Consequently, the extraction graph may be incomplete regarding knowledge that could beinferred by applying simple logic.Therefore, it is essential to consider the semantic domains of a dataset and the different categories ofmeaning present within it. The predicates in Table 1 can be subgrouped into broad semantic categories of causal,associative, and subsumptive predicates. For example, causal predicates such as CAUSES describe a cause-and-effectrelationship between two entities. In comparison, associative predicates such as ASSOCIATES_WITH andCOEXISTS_WITH describe a relationship in which two entities are frequently found together. On the other hand,subsumptive predicates such as PART_OF describe relationships in which one concept is in a hierarchical (“AD IS_Adementia”) or a mereological (from the Greek μερος, 'part') part-whole relationship77,78 with another.The logical properties of predicates are essential for knowledge representation and inference, especially inmachine reading. Predicates belonging to the causal, associative, and subsumptive categories possess logicallydefined properties such as transitivity, symmetry, asymmetry, and reflexivity that enable the reasoning and inferenceof new knowledge about relationships between entities. We can derive additional knowledge from the data throughinferences by utilizing these logical properties. Detailed operation definitions and examples of these properties maybe found in File I., Background S2. Logical properties.To exploit these properties and logically infer entailed but missing triples, we mapped a subset of themachine readers’ predicates to their logical definition in terms of its logical properties using the logical definitionfrom the object properties in the Relation Ontology (RO)79. The UMLS to RO mappings are available in file II.,Table S1. and the analyses of logical properties of the predicates in Table 1 are in file IVpredicatePropertyAnalysis.xlsx for each machine reading system.13bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphWe then used the transitive, symmetric, asymmetric, reflexive, and inverse properties present in RO in aprocedure to infer new triples entailed by the extraction graph80,81. This procedure entails loading the initialextraction graph into the CLIPS forward-chaining production rule system 82 (https://clipsrules.net/) via the CLIPSPyPython library66. Simple rules using symmetric and transitive relationships belonging to RO predicates were appliedto infer new triples and add them to the extraction graph. The CLIPS inference engine also tracked belief scores tomanage uncertainty about the validity of inferred triples. New triples inferred from symmetric inference wereassigned the same belief score as the asserted triple. The inference engine multiplied the belief score for each of thetwo asserted triples in transitive inference and assigned it to the inferred triple. All triples inferred from transitivitywith a belief score of≤0.6 were filtered out. The value 0.6 was chosen as a heuristic threshold to mimic a weakenedtransitivity property83, limiting transitive inference beyond one hop. For example, recalling that SemRep triples wereassigned a belief score of 0.8, the first inferred triple from a transitive SemRep predicate would be retained because,through the application of the chain rule where each node is dependent on the previous nodes, 0.8 * 0.8 = 0.64.Subsequently, inferred triples would be filtered out since 0.8 * 0.8 * 0.8 < 0.6.2.4 Constructing the KGPhenotype Knowledge Translator (PheKnowLator) is anEcosystem and Python 3 library designed to construct semanticallyrich, large-scale biomedical KGs from biomedical ontologies andcomplex heterogeneous data84. We cloned the PheKnowLator 2.0 codeand ran the ontology hygiene and data preparation documented in theproject’s Jupyter workbooks. PheKnowLator merged several ontologiesrepresented using OWL85 related to genes, diseases, proteins,chemicals, vaccines, and other ontologies of biological interest. Theseontologies are enumerated in Listing 1. Complete information about the resources used in PheKnowLator (version2.0) is available on GitHub86. Each class in the ontologies merged by the PheKnowLator process formed nodes inthe KG. Thus, the object properties assigned to each class formed an edge in the KG. The edges were extended byintegrating data sources that connected classes using object properties provided by the RO79. Finally, the resulting14bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphKG was saved as an OWL ontology and a Python NetworkX graph object87. For more information on the Jupyternotebook, the mapping, and logical closure, see File VII. Appendix_C.docx.2.4.1 Combining the Extraction Graph with PheKnowLatorSeveral steps were required to integrate the extraction graph with the PheKnowLator KG so that we couldstudy its application in causal feature selection. The first step was to map the UMLS concept unique identifiers inthe SemRep output to the OBO Foundry identifiers used by the PheKnowLator KG. We used existing mappings inthe UMLS for the Gene Ontology and Human Phenotype Ontology classes supplemented by a query of the BioportalAnnotator service for other ontologies81. The REACH machine reader automatically generated mappings to OBOFoundry identifiers which we then added to a mapping table. We also mapped SemRep predicates to the RO versionused by the PheKnowLator workflow as SemRep predicates when those predicates were not present in the RO.2.4.2 Reweighting the edges to support path searchThe PheKnowLator KG had features deriving from the knowledge representation that made querying andpath search challenging without further processing. The downstream use of the weighting scheme described in thissection was to influence the shortest path and simple path searches so that they would include fewer edges and nodesthat were present in the knowledge graph to support OWL semantics and more edges and nodes that werebiologically interesting. The ontologies were written in the OWL description logic language, which uses logicalstatements to define the semantics of ontology entities. Our approach used a reweighting procedure to distill the KGinto biologically meaningful entities useful for our study. Therefore, we used the following steps and heuristics toremove OWL semantic statements and reweight the edges of the KG:1.) Apply OWL-NETS to the KG to simplify Web Ontology Language (OWL)-encoded biomedicalknowledge into an easier-to-use network representation. OWL-NETS replaced the more complexlogical statements with simpler triples without losing biologically relevant information (for examples, seehttps://github.com/callahantiff/PheKnowLator/wiki/OWL-NETS-2.0)88.2.) Remove all KG edges that specify a disjoint relationship between a subject and object in a triple. Adisjoint relationship in OWL specifies that the class extension of a class description has no members incommon with the class extension of another class description81. While disjoint relationships are helpful for15bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphdeductive closure of the KG using a description logic reasoner, they lead to uninformative results from apath search that seeks a mechanistic explanation.3.) Remove all edges in the KG that specify the domain of a relationship from the RO. Many RO relationsspecify the ontology classes that comprise the relations’ domain and range. Like the disjoint relationshipsmentioned earlier, including these edges helps maintain logical consistency during deductive closure butleads to uninformative results from a path search that seeks a mechanistic explanation.4.) Reweight each edge in the graph to influence the path search on predicates useful for mechanisticexplanations. The weighting strategy is based on observing the method used in PheKnowLator to representtriples of value for constructing a mechanistic explanation explained below:a.) Assign default edge weights. Since the PheKnowLator KG is not weighted by default, start byassigning a default weight of 2 to all edges. The value of 2 has no special significance except avalue greater than 0.b.) Favor hierarchical relationships. Hierarchical relationships can be very informative formechanistic explanations. Most of the classes represented in the ontologies that have beenmerged are hierarchical and are represented using the rdfs:subClassOf predicate. If apredicate relates a subject to an object by rdfs:subClassOf: weight = 0. Assignment ofsubClasOf weights to zero lowers the cost of including a hierarchical edge in a path searchthrough the KG, which increases the prevalence of hierarchical edges in path search results.c.) Favor edges providing a mechanistic triples RO. We developed a simple heuristic toproduce mechanistic triples and avoid triples that provide meta-knowledge about entities in anontology. If the predicate relates a subject to an object by owl:someValuesFrom: weight = 0.Similarly, if the object is a RO entity and the predicate is owl:onProperty: weight = 0.d.) Disfavor subjects and edges that primarily describe metadata. If the subject is a RO entityor the edge is owl:equivalentClass: weight = 5.The procedure above aims to prune the KG components that are not useful for inferring biological mechanisms andto optimize the KG for providing explanations of links between biomedical entities in terms of the underlying16bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphmolecular mechanisms based on information contained in the biomedical ontology inputs.Finally, we created two copies of the PheKnowLator KG - one that was loaded into a graph data store(OpenLink Virtuoso version 7.2089) so that it could be queried using the SPARQL graph querying language, and theother that was saved as a Python NetworkX MultiDiGraph object for the application of path search algorithms. Theextraction graph was loaded into the same graph data store as the PheKnowLator KG for querying.2.5 Searching the KGA primary objective of this paper is to identify possible confounders, colliders, and mediators from the KGsearch. Hence, identifying the variables that belong to each causal role constitute the competency questions. Toanswer these competency questions, we translated the standard epidemiological criteria for these variables intodiscovery patterns, or semantic constraints we use to identify variables of interest. We used these discovery patternsas requirements to construct queries implemented in the SPARQL graph querying language. The SPARQL queriesare described in more detail in the paragraphs below. Table 2 presents each causal role as a competency questionwith its associated discovery pattern. Note that each dyad in the discovery patterns also implies chains of causation,i.e.,”A INTERACTS_WITH B CAUSES_OR_INFLUENCES_CONDITION C.”Table 2. Summary of the competency questions and discovery pattern approach to finding answers via KG search.The left column enumerates the competency questions, and the right column describes the graph search foranswering the competency questions identifying confounders, colliders, and mediators.Competency questions1. What are the potential confounders of depression and AD?2. What are the potential colliders of depression and AD?3. What are the potential mediators between depression and AD?Discovery patternsconfounder CAUSES depression;confounder CAUSES AD.depression CAUSES collider;AD CAUSES collider.depression CAUSES mediator;mediator CAUSES AD.KG search was implemented using Dijkstra’s shortest path search over the KG based on queries in theSPARQL graph querying language. Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm was used to identify the shortest paths betweennodes of interest in the KG. We chose Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm as a simple way to test proof-of-concept,though there are many other graph search methods. The Dijkstra algorithm is a variant of the best-first search that17bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphprioritizes finding the shortest path between potential nodes. (Note that many paths are of the same length.) Formore information on the SPARQL queries and to inspect the raw output from running the queries, see File VII.Appendix_C.docx.The KG search was comprised of two stages. In the first stage, the KG search was implemented asDijkstra’s shortest path search over the KG based on a query in the SPARQL over the extraction graph. Recall thatthe extraction graph was the subgraph of the KG containing the literature-derived triples and edges inferred from thelogical closure procedure. The purpose of the first stage is to use the concepts identified by machine reading plus theinferred edges to expand the breadth of variables, i.e., improve the completeness of the machine reading outputs.In the second stage, the query uses the results from the first stage query are used (represented universalresource identifiers or URIs) as the start and end nodes for the input (as the start and end nodes) of the queries overthe ontology-grounded KG. The purpose of this stage was to filter the literature-derived information through theontology-grounded knowledge with the goal of improving accuracy over the literature-derived knowledge. Ourdiscovery pattern-based KG search implementation is constrained to subsumptive and causal predicates. The causalpredicates include CAUSES_OR_CONTRIBUTES_TO_CONDITION, GENETICALLY_INTERACTS_WITH, andMOLECULARLY_INTERACTS_WITH. These ontology-based predicates were chosen because they describe mechanisticcausal links between disease and the genomic and biomolecular entities and processes essential for our use case.To provide hypothetical explanations of the causal association between identified variables and depressionand Alzheimer's disease (AD), our KG search implementation traced the path of nodes and predicates traversed byDijkstra's shortest path search algorithm. These paths, which we refer to as reasoning paths, reveal the causalrelationships and ontological links between concepts and allow us to derive an explanation linking biochemicalprocesses with molecular definitions of disease from combined literature- and ontology-derived structuredknowledge.We created visualizations of the reasoning paths to facilitate the analysis and interpretation of the variables.As an illustration, Figure 3 presents a sample reasoning path in its raw form as output from the KG search and in itstransformed format that includes ontological and causal predicates. The transformed format provides a clear andintuitive representation of the relationships and causal links uncovered through the KG search process. These18bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphvisualizations provide hypothetical mechanistic explanations for the causal role played by each variable in theidentified associations according to these reasoning paths. Overall, by tracing the reasoning paths and creatingvisualizations, we can provide hypothetical explanations of the causal associations between the identified variablesand depression and AD.Figure 3. This figure shows two versions of a SPARQL query's (partial) output. (a.) shows sample raw output fromthe SPARQL query, and (b.) shows a visualization we manually created from the output. Note that the visualizationdisplays hierarchical (IS_A), mereological (from the Greek μερος, 'part'), e.g., PART_OF, HAS_PART, relationshipsvertically, and causal relationships (INTERACTS_WITH, CAUSES_OR_CONTRIBUTES_TO_CONDITION) vertically.Throughout the article, we will present reasoning paths where they serve as useful visual representations ofthe relationships and causal links discovered in our KG search.2.6 Causal Feature Selection (Evaluation)Our evaluation procedure is summarized here and described in more detail in the paragraphs below:1. Present KG search results for confounder, collider, and mediator variables for depression and AD(partially answering H1). We conducted a KG search to identify the confounders, colliders, and mediatorsof depression and AD and reported the KG search results and sample reasoning paths.19bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph2. Display the KG search results as causal diagrams in two forms: simple roles and combination roles(partially answering H1 and H2). In addition to the simple roles of confounder, collider, and mediator, ourmethodology allows for the identification of variables with complex behavior, referred to as combinationroles, which are additional role categories for variables with more than one causal role, and includeconfounder/mediators, confounder/colliders, and confounder/mediator/colliders. These variables withcombination roles were identified using set operations, such as set difference and intersection, on the list ofvariables for each role type.3. Compare the KG search results with SemMedDB and reported covariates in published observationalstudies using Venn diagrams (partially answering H1 and H2). We compared the KG search results withresults from searching the SemMedDBScoped and SemMedDBComplete databases to understand the differencesbetween our novel feature selection and complementary methods for causal feature selection, including theconsistency with which concepts are classified by their causal role(s). The search results for simple andcombination roles were summarized. Additionally, we compared the KG and SemMedDBComplete withconfounders reported in a small database of confounders from a pilot-metareview. For more information onthe SQL queries, see File VII. Appendix_C.docx.4. Prioritize and conduct in-depth analysis on a subset of variables (partially answering H1, H2, and H3).A subset of the variables was selected for in-depth analysis to prioritize the results of the KG search. Thisin-depth analysis aimed to provide further insight into the search results’ veracity and the reasoning paths'usefulness (H3).As noted earlier, we compiled a database of confounders from a pilot meta-review of confounding control.More information, including details on the pilot meta-review, is provided on each step below.2.6.1 Confounders, colliders, and mediators KG searchWe report the confounders, colliders, and mediators for depression and AD identified by searching the KG.To show the feasibility of our pilot project, KG search should be able to identify causal variables playing each role,and thereby demonstrate competency.20bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph2.6.2 Analysis of search resultsIn addition to the pre-defined, “simple” roles (confounder, collider, and mediator, mentioned earlier), ourcompilation procedures allow us to identify variables with complex behavior, i.e., “combination” roles, which wedefine as additional role categories for variables with more than one causal role. The combination roles includedconfounder/mediators, confounder/colliders, and confounder/mediator/colliders. Our rationale was to sort out theroles played by the variables and identify variables with complex behavior of which other researchers ought to beaware. The combination roles were identified using set operations, e.g., set difference and intersection, over the listof variables for each role type. For example, to identify “Confounders only” variables, we perform a set differenceoperation over the set of confounders minus the set of variables appearing in the collider, mediator, or both KGsearch result sets.2.6.3 Comparing search resultsWe sought to understand how our novel feature selection differs from complementary methods for causalfeature selection using SQL queries to identify relevant variables from the literature explored in previous researchand with confounders reported in published observational studies investigating depression as a risk factor for AD ordementia. To this end, we compared the KG search results with results from searching the original scopedpredictions in MachineReadingDBScoped and SemMedDBComplete. MachineReadingDBScoped contained the originalsubset of structured knowledge restricted to human clinical studies on AD published in 2010 or after that we used toconstruct the extraction graph. SemMedDBComplete contained the entire database of SemRep predicates extracted fromtitles and abstracts of articles published in 2010 or after. We summarized the search results for simple and complexroles as we did in the previous subsubsection. To gain insight into the veracity of our search results, we alsoconducted a comparison of search results for confounders with confounders reported in the literature. Such acomparison hinges on the existence of a database of reported confounders in the published literature. However, nosuch standardized and validated causal question-specific confounder database exists. Fortunately, however, we havebeen developing just such a confounder database in parallel research.In the pilot meta-review, we manually collected from a small corpus of observational studies investigatingdepression as the exposure and dementia or AD as the outcome. We based on recommendations from the Cochrane21bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphGroup90. Confounders appearing in the search results that were already recognized in the pilot meta-review of theliterature partially validate the soundness of our methods. Information on confounders was manually collected froma small corpus of papers and entered into a spreadsheet. This small corpus included confounders reported in threepapers studying depression cited by the Lancet Commission Report (LCR) on late-life modifiable risk factors fordementia53. We reason that papers cited in the LCR should be of relatively high quality. Additional reportedconfounders from four sporadically collected papers over the course of our research. We also collected informationon each paper's exposure and outcome definitions included in the corpus. In this way, we could ensure that onlyconfounders specific to depression and dementia or depression and AD were included in our database. Hence, whilethe corpus of papers analyzed is small and the scoping strategy was not systematic, reflecting the preliminary stageof this research, which focused on the feasibility of building such a database rather than exhaustiveness, theconfounders in the database can be assured to be accurate and reflective of confounders recognized as such byhuman content-matter experts.Finally, we compiled the reported confounders into a set containing each confounder to execute thecomparison.Confounders appearing in search results that have already been recognized as such partially validate thesoundness of our methods. Search results that do not appear in the literature may indicate that the search results areerroneous or that the search-identified confounder may have been overlooked. Alternatively, since our datacollecting strategy was not systematic, our confounder database is not comprehensive. Hence, certain reportedconfounders may be missed, and potential confounders appearing in the search may not be novel confounders afterall.2.6.4 In-depth analysisIn our study, we conducted several additional posthoc analyses on a set of variables obtained from aKnowledge Graph (KG) search. Due to the large number of variables identified through the KG search, weprioritized the subset of variables to be analyzed in-depth based on several criteria, including the potential to addressconfounding bias, the strength of the relationship as indicated by the strength of the association, scientific interest,and degree of surprise (a concept not present in pilot meta-review but present in the KG and SemMedDBComplete, orpresent but with conflicting assertions causal directionality).22bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphOne of the human experts who conducted the verification procedure (CES, with expertise in the populationneuroscience of ADRD) was a content expert in Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias (ADRD). The otherhuman expert (HTK) has expertise in bioengineering and focuses on the biology of brain aging.The human experts examined the source sentences from SemMedDB along with the reasoning pathsproduced by the KG search for those variables. The task was then to determine if the claims asserted by the KG andSemMedDBComplete, i.e., the source sentences from SemMedDB along with the reasoning paths produced by the KGsearch, were consistent with a combination of the human expert’s background knowledge and information gleanedperforming additional searches in PubMed to fill in any gaps in their understanding.In summary, after prioritizing a subset of variables for further examination, the post hoc analysis performedin our study aimed to verify the validity of selected confounders through a human expert-based verificationprocedure.3. ResultsFigure 4 shows the result of applying post-processing procedures to the extracted triples. 13,365PubMed-indexed articles were returned from PubMed, resulting in 226,997 triples from machine reading. Thenumber of triples remaining after executing the knowledge hygiene procedure was 94,934, or 41.8% of the originaltriples. The subject and object entities of the entire set of triples included 10,020 unique UMLS CUIs, of which2,504 were mapped to ontological identifiers and merged using the PheKnowLator workflow (2,110 from Bioportal,844 from the Gene Ontology91,92 and Human Phenotype Ontology93 mappings present in UMLS, and 394 fromREACH). After filtering out the machine reading and inferred triples with a belief score of < 0.8 and mappingpredicates to the RO, the total number of machine reading triples was 20,010, or 8.8% of the original total.23bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphFigure 4. This figure illustrates merging the outputs from the machine reading systems, performing knowledgehygiene, and applying logical closure operations on the extraction graph.The KG from the PheKnowLator workflow contained 18,869,980 triples. Table 3 shows the counts ofinferred edges by predicate type. The most significant gains by predicate typeCAUSES_OR_CONTRIBUTES_TO_CONDITION yielded the most novel inferred causal edges, followed byCAUSAL_RELATION_BETWEEN_PROCESSES. There were zero inferred edges for certain other predicate types becausewe did not define the logical properties of those predicates to allow for inference. Table 4 shows the count of edgesfor four triple types relating genes or variants of genes to health conditions.Table 3. Counts of triples inferred using the logical closure operations given the symmetric and transitive propertiesof the literature-derived predicates from machine reading. Transitive and symmetric closure produced 73,046 triplesafter filtering out inferred triples with a belief score of < 0.6 and those without a mapping to the RO.Predicate TypeMachineReadingCAPABLE_OF_INHIBITING_OR_PREVENTINGPATHOLOGICAL_PROCESS683CAUSAL_RELATION_BETWEEN_PROCESSESCAUSES_OR_CONTRIBUTES_TO_CONDITIONCORRELATED_WITHEXISTENCE_OVERLAPS_WITHINTERACTS_WITHINVOLVED_IN_POSITIVE_REGULATION_OFIS_SUBSTANCE_THAT_TREATS3,1032,0033,0002,5281,2364572,647InferredSymmetric (yes/no)Transitive (yes/no)020,94545,6973,0002,5281,23600NoNoNoYesYesYesNoNoYesYesYesNoNoNoNoNo24bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphMOLECULARLY_INTERACTS_WITHNEGATIVELY_REGULATESPART_OFPHOSPHORYLATESPRECEDESREGULATES78161,355181363,512006,92903130NoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoYesNoYesNoTable 4. The count of four causal predicates in the KG produced by PheKnowLator after running OWL-NETS.Predicate TypeCAUSES_OR_CONTRIBUTES_TO_CONDITIONMOLECULARLY_INTERACTS_WITHGENETICALLY_INTERACTS_WITH# of triples113,8375,678,8293,246,417Note that we did not collect detailed, precise runtimes for these analyses. All analyses were performed onmodest hardware configurations. The execution of the INDRA machine reading component took several days. Thepost-processing of the SemRep and INDRA outputs took minutes. The construction of the knowledge graph tookdays. Finally, the execution of all of the SPARQL queries took several hours on the modest hardware.3.1 Answering competency questions3.1.1 Question #1 - What are the potential confounders of Depression and AD?The KG search found 126 unique variables potentially confounding the association between depression andAD, including 47 conditions or phenotypes, 43 drugs, and 35 genes or enzymes. Examples included apolipoproteins,arachidonic acid, chronic infectious disease, encephalopathies, estradiol, hypercholesterolemia, hypoglycemia,inflammatory response, interleukin-6, myocardial infarction, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. (The KG searchfound 141. Fifteen of the 141 confounders appeared to be redundant, e.g., vascular endothelial growth factor A(PR_000017284) and vascular endothelial growth factor A (human) (PR_P15692)). However, according to PRO,these concepts are not the same. The human version (PR_P15692) is a child of (PR_000017284), so we retainedboth in the KG. For the purposes of reporting in the tables, we have merged these concepts.The shortest path lengths returned by Dijkstra’s path search algorithm varied from 2 (15 paths from aconfounder to depression / 16 paths from a confounder to AD) to 9 (2 paths, both from confounder to depression or25bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphconfounder to AD). The paths for the confounder with the longest path lengths (statin (CHEBI_87631)) includedpaths that passed through the hub molecular entity (CHEBI_23367). The majority of confounders had paths todepression or AD with 4 or fewer path lengths (77 paths with <= 4 steps to depression and 80 paths with <= 4 stepsto AD). Figure 5 depicts the reasoning path for inflammatory response.Figure 5. Sample reasoning pathway of inflammatory response, a confounder identified by KG search. Note that they-axis is the TYPE_OF/subsumption axis. The x-axis is the CAUSES/INTERACTS_WITH axis. SOD2 is superoxidedismutase 2, a gene that encodes a mitochondrial protein. SOD2 is associated with diabetes and gastric cancer94.SOD2 polymorphisms are associated with neurodegenerative diseases, including cognitive decline, stroke, andAD95,96. SOD2 is a gene that scavenges for reactive oxygen species (ROS) resulting from environmental exposures,e.g., bisphenol A, that result in inflammation97. Bisphenol A is found ubiquitously in plastics and is ingested fromwater bottles, packaged food, and many other sources98–100.3.1.2 Question #2 - What are potential colliders of Depression and AD?The KG search found 28 unique potential colliders for depression and AD. These included amyotrophiclateral sclerosis, anemia, apraxias, atherosclerosis, brain hemorrhage, cerebral amyloid angiopathy, cerebrovascularaccident, congestive heart failure, deglutition disorders, dementia, diabetes mellitus, diabetes mellitus,non-insulin-dependent, encephalitis, falls, frontotemporal dementia, homeostasis, immune response, insulinresistance, ischemic stroke, malnutrition, neurofibrillary degeneration (morphologic abnormality), osteoporosis,parkinsonian disorders, pathogenesis, pneumonia, psychotic disorders, senile plaques, stroke, and tauopathies.Note that in the list of colliders above, the KG search identified as potential colliders several variables wehave emphasized by italicizing and underlining. The KG may have inferred dementia because AD is a specificdementia etiology. Homeostasis may have been included in the results as a generic biological process that was notfiltered out. Finally, it would not make sense that AD would cause frontotemporal dementia, the most commondementia in patients younger than 60. We drop supercategories like dementia and generic processes like homeostasisfor our analysis since these can be easily identified and explained away from context as spurious.26bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphThere were two colliders identified using SPARQL for which no path could be found from depression tothe collider in the KG created using the PheKnowLator workflow (falls (HP_0002527) and neurofibrillary tangles(HP_0002185)). Two of the 26 colliders with paths from depression in KG had multiple identifiers (cerebralamyloid angiopathy (HP_0011970 and DOID_9246) and frontotemporal dementia (DOID_10216, DOID_9255, andHP_0002145)). Path search identified a total of 29 collider entities in KG.For depression to the colliders, the path lengths of the shortest paths returned were 7 steps for 2 colliders, 8for 26, and 9 for 1. The majority of colliders (24) resulted in 5 or more shortest paths returned. For AD to thecolliders, the path step counts were slightly lower at 6 steps for 2 colliders, 7 for 26 colliders, and 8 for 1 collider.Similar to depression, 23 colliders have 5 or more shortest path lengths from AD.As shown in Figure 6 below, the typical path pattern for both cases involved passing through the hub nodenervous system (UBERON_0001016) and nervous system process (GO_0050877) that molecularly interacts with adrug or chemical that also interacts with a gene that causes or contributes to AD.Figure 6. Sample reasoning pathway of malnutrition, a collider identified by KG search. The MTHFR gene is agene that encodes the Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) enzyme that is critical for the metabolism ofamino acids, including homocysteine101. MTHFR perturbations and mutations decrease the metabolism and elevatehomocysteine. Elevated homocysteine is linked with blood clots and thrombosis events102–104. Homocysteine hasbeen reported in the published literature as a confounder of depression and AD in at least one observational study 105.Elevated homocysteine is also associated with low levels of vitamins B6 and B12 and folate.27bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph3.1.3 Question #3 - What are the potential mediators of Depression and AD?The KG search found 18 unique potential mediators that were conditions or phenotypes for depression andAD. These included amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, anemia, atherosclerosis, cerebral amyloid angiopathy, cerebralhemorrhage, congestive heart failure, dementia, diabetes mellitus, dysphagia, insulin resistance, ischemic stroke,malnutrition, osteoporosis, parkinsonism, pathogenesis, stroke, tauopathy, type II diabetes mellitus. The shortestpath lengths from Dijkstra’s path search algorithm were 8 for depression to mediators. There is more variety in pathlength from mediators to AD, with most path lengths between 4 and 6. As is shown in Figure 7 below, the typicalpath pattern for both cases involves associating the disorder (depression or a mediator) with a nervous systemprocess that molecularly interacts with a chemical that causes or contributes to AD.Figure 7. Sample reasoning pathway of Parkinsonian disorders, a potential mediator for AD identified by KGsearch. Prodynorphin (PDYN) is a gene that produces endogenous opioid peptides involved with motor control andmovement106 implicated in neurodegenerative diseases that modulate response to psychoactive substances, includingcocaine and ethanol107. The gene insulin growth factor 2 (IGF2) is associated with development and growth.Perfluorooctanoic acid and bisphenol A exposure is associated with neurodegeneration resulting in AD108.Hippocampal IGF2 expression is decreased in AD-diagnosed patients109. Increased IGF2 expression improvescognition in AD mice models110.3.2 Analysis of search results by causal role3.2.1 Simple rolesFigure 8 illustrates the phenotype variables produced from our KG search. Aside from the conditions weanalyzed, the KG search also identified pharmaceutical substances, genes, and enzymes as confounders. However,the shortest path parameters produced no search results from our queries for colliders and mediators belonging to28bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphthose semantic categories. Note also the same pattern was observed searching SemMedDB. We report the completeset of variables the KG identified in the spreadsheet in the Supplementary Materials in File III., Worksheet S2, andWorksheet S3. (see the worksheets entitled “Substances” and “GenesEnzymes,” respectively), and in File II.Appendix B. Figures S1 and S2.Figure 8. This diagram shows the variables identified using their causal roles relating to depression and AD bytranslating standard epidemiological definitions into patterns for querying the KG.3.2.2 Complex rolesFigure 9 illustrates the same conditions from Figure 8, albeit in a more distilled form since we distinguishbetween variables playing single versus the different categories of combination roles. Twenty-two distinctconfounders and nine colliders were found to behave solely in one role. The KG search could not find any variablesthat behave exclusively in the role of mediator. The rest of the variables fulfilled two or more causal roles. Of these,11 variables fulfilled the criteria of all three causal roles.29bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphFigure 9. This diagram shows variables according to their roles, including single and hybrid role types for therelationship between depression (exposure) and AD (outcome). Each rectangular box in the figure lists all theconditions by single role (confounder, collider, or mediator) or combination roles (e.g., mediator/collider). Forexample, the box labeled “Confounders only” contains covariates that are exclusively confounders and were notfound to act as a collider or a mediator.Note that the graphs in Figures 8 and 9 are not, strictly speaking, causal DAGs since they depict cycles.Since causal DAGs cannot represent cyclic relationships, new graph formalisms can represent latent variables andcycles (feedback loops) by generalizing the causal interpretation of DAGs, e.g., directed mixed graphs (DMGs)111,chain graphs112.3.3 KG vs. SemMedDB and reported covariates in the published literatureTable 5 shows the confounders from the pilot meta-review of reported confounders we gathered fromhuman observational studies investigating depression as the exposure and dementia or Alzheimer’s disease as theoutcome. About half of the studies were prospective cohort studies. The other study designs used were case-controland using twins for controls. We looked at studies at AD-specific studies, to see if there were differences betweenthose used mainly from dementia-focused studies below, but could not find any major differences.Table 5. Reported confounders from published studies investigating depression and AD (or dementia) from our pilotmeta-review.PMIDExposureOutcomeConfounders27138970113depressiondementiaage, sex, APOEɛ4 carrier status, educational level, BMI, smoking, alcohol consumption, cognitive score,antidepressant use, and disease status at baseline33726788114depression andcerebrovasculardiseasedementiaage, sex, residential area, income level, comorbidities (myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, peripheralvascular disease, chronic pulmonary disease, connective tissue disorder, peptic ulcer, mild liver disease,uncomplicated and complicated diabetes, hemiplegia, non-metastatic solid cancer, moderate or severe liver diseases,metastatic solid cancer)23154050115depression,mediated by ADADbaseline cognition, age, education, the total number of medications, and brain weight at autopsy30bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphpathology28514478116depressiondementiaage, sex, race/ethnicity, marital status, education, occupational position, smoking, longstanding physical illness, fruitand vegetable consumption, diabetes, coronary heart disease, stroke, antidepressant use19485655117depressiondementiaage, gender, zygosity, i.e., "mono- or non-monozygotic twin status,” and years of education28463236118depressiondementiaage, date of birth, education, smoking, medical history27138970113depressiondementiaage, sex, APOe4 status, education, bmi, alcohol consumption, cognitive score, antidepressant usage, prevalencedisease at baselineWhile demographic variables such as age and sex are consistently reported and there is considerableoverlap between some of the covariates including APOEɛ4 status and comorbidities related to kidneys, liver, andcardiovascular systems, there is inconsistency between studies, presumably depending on whether or not data wereavailable for these variables, a common pattern in observational studies119,120. Note that the second study in the thirdrow of Table 5, with the many types of cancer listed as confounders, is something of an outlier.31bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph32bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphWe omitted columns for the INDRA machine reading systems (EIDOS and REACH) in Figure 10 becausethere were no variables identified using information from those sources.Only a small number of confounders appear in all sources, though many confounders appear in twosources. We see a moderately high concurrence between the KG and SemMedDBComplete, but there are curious andperhaps telling patterns. For instance, among the discordant results, there is a pattern that concerns the semanticcategories of output. Specifically, SemRep had better recall performance for variables that are potentially moredifficult to establish mechanistically, e.g., psychiatric symptoms (“agitation,” “dyssomnias,” “feeling hopeless”) orlifestyle factors (e.g., exercise, family history). Moreover, the concepts identified by KG search results are generallyless redundant than those from searching the literature (e.g., diabetes, diabetes mellitus). SearchingSemMedDBComplete yielded the most search results. Searching the KG yielded fewer search results. SearchingMachineReadingDBScoped yielded still fewer results. This is not surprising since the KG was harmonized whileSemMedDBComplete search was not, resulting in some concepts with multiple names.33bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphAgain, only a small number of confounders appear in all sources. Two primary patterns that stand out inFigure 11 are the relatively high degree of concordance between the KG and SemMedDBComplete regarding34bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphconfounders and combination variables that play all three roles (confounder, collider, and mediator) on the one hand.Note that while there is a literature describing the three “simple” or core roles (confounder, collider, and mediator),the literature for confounder/mediator (also called time-varying confounding and treatment-confounder feedback) isthe only type of combination or hybrid variable for which a literature exists14. From this point on, we call variablesplaying all three roles, such as stroke, chimeras. In Greek mythology, a chimera is a creature with a fire-breathinghead of a lion, a goat's body, and a snake's tail. From the perspective of valid causal inference, the chimera is adangerous variable category because conditioning on chimeras, like conditioning on mediators and colliders, canpotentially distort measures of association or effect. Thus, chimeras are important to identify to avoid introducingbias. On the other hand, the recall performance for the other types of exclusive and the combination variable is poor.For example, anemia appears in “Mediator only” in the KG search results but in “Confounders only” in theSemMedDBComplete search results.3.4 Manual qualitative evaluation of search resultsIn this section, we analyze five condition variables in-depth. We prioritized conditions for in-depth analysisfor the following reasons. First and foremost, as noted before, conditions were the only category of biomedicalentity variable identified as playing all three causal roles in both the KG search results and in SemMedDB search.Hence, phenotypes were the only category of variable we could analyze from the standpoint of untangling thecomplexity of combined causal roles using the reasoning path outputs. Secondly, it would have been infeasible toanalyze all the variables. We had to prioritize a subset of variables. Thirdly, conditions were the most frequentlyreported category of reported confounder in published observational studies after sociodemographic characteristics,health behaviors, and APOEε2/3/4 status. Fourthly, our use case focused on variables that would be commonlyavailable in an electronic medical records system, which ruled out biomarkers.3.4.1 ConfoundersThe objective of this section was to provide an in-depth analysis of the evidence supporting theclassification of a sample of potentially newly discovered confounders for depression and AD. The source sentencesfor review of three variables identified as being “confounders only” in both the KG and SemMedDBComplete: chronicinfectious disease (CID), obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), and vitamin D deficiency (VDD) are available in the35bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphSupplementary Materials in File V. ConfounderSourceSentences.xlsx. (Note that SQL code for running the querieswith which to obtain sources sentences from SemMedDB is included in the final worksheet of File V.)These variables were chosen for analysis because: (1.) they occurred in both KG and SemMedDBComplete,and the agreement was unanimous about their categorization (confirmation by two distinct methods); (2.) they hadthe most support in SemMedDB, and we could analyze the source sentences and publications supporting theircategorization as confounders (amount of evidence, i.e., the # of retrieved and pertinent predications); and (3.) thepractical usefulness for our use case, scientific interest, and surprise. In this case, OSA, CID, and VDD pertaineddirectly to our use case, and had support in SemMedDB, yet, surprisingly, they did not appear in the publishedobservational studies we examined, though our review was not comprehensive.In the view of the content expert, all three variables seemed biologically plausible common causes of bothdepression and AD. OSA seemed to have the most (10 predications from 9 distinct publications supportingOSA→depression (where “→” means “CAUSES”) and 22 predications from 21 distinct publications supportingOSA→AD) and the strongest evidence browsing PubMed. The 3 strongest “OSA→depression” predications and the2 strongest “OSA→AD” predications are marked in the spreadsheet.While there is a larger body of evidence on infections and AD, the evidence was less extensive overall forvitamin D deficiency (2 predications from 2 distinct publications supporting CID→depression and 4 predicationsfrom 4 distinct publications supporting CID→AD).The sentences concerning VDD also supported it as a confounder (3 predications from 3 distinctpublications supporting CID→depression and 9 predications from 9 distinct publications supporting CID→AD).Notably, however, the expert noted the difficulty in assessing the evidence quality from one sentence, andthe need to drill down into the article to determine if the causal assertion was transferable. When reviewing the OSA→ MDD and OSA → AD assertions, the expert noted that the various studies were all plausible and includedprimary studies (e.g., OSA to MDD: supported by PMID 20939075, 27631236, 33158487, 33158487 andOSA→AD supported by PMID 27070140, 28329084). In general, OSA is a well-known risk factor for both MDDand AD both clinically and in research.36bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph3.4.2 Stroke as a chimeric variableThe source sentences from SemMedDB for stroke are included in the Supplementary Materials in File VI.ChimeraSourceSentences.xlsx. (Note that SQL code for running the queries to obtain the source sentence fromSemMedDB is included in the final worksheet of File VI.)Stroke was selected for further analysis in thisstudy due to its frequent appearance as a confounder inreported observational studies. Despite being commonlyconsidered a confounder without referencing stroke-subtype(e.g., see the phenotype definition for stroke from Singh-Manoux et al.116), both the KG and SemMedDBCompletesearch results indicated that the role of stroke might vary depending on its subtype, specifically between ischemicand hemorrhagic. These findings were further supported by the results of a PubMed search, which highlighted thepotential difficulties in conditioning on stroke without considering its subtype.Stroke was identified as a chimera by both the KG and SemMedDBComplete. The support for stroke as achimera was substantive, though with a caveat where the interpretation of the meaning of stroke depends on thestroke subtype. To review the meaning of stroke, a stroke results from a reduced blood supply to the brain fromeither constriction, e.g., ischemic stroke, or hemorrhage, e.g., hemorrhagic stroke, or intracerebral hemorrhage.There are also less immediately devastating stroke-like events called transient ischemic attacks that presage futuremore serious stroke events. Ischemic stroke is a known risk factor for both depression121–123 and AD124–126. Althoughthe KG search classified both stroke and the ischemic stroke subtype as chimeras, presumably including bothsubtypes under the umbrella term or hypernym of stroke, the evidence was stronger for ischemic stroke as a chimera.However, evidence for AD as a risk factor was weaker for ischemic than for hemorrhagic stroke125. In themeta-analysis of Waziri et al. based on four national studies and assessing the relative risk of hemorrhagic vs.ischemic stroke in AD vs. non-AD patients and applying matching criteria, the relative risk of AD patients vs.similar non-AD controls was 1.41 (95% CI 1.23-1.64) for hemorrhagic stroke but 1.15 (95% CI 0.89-1.48) forischemic stroke. A PubMed search did not yield any specific information about the hemorrhagic stroke subtype as aconfounder.37bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph3.4.3 Resolving contradictions between SemMedDB and KG searchAnemia was selected for further analysis in this study due to its complex and contradictory relationshipwith depression and Alzheimer's disease. The supporting evidence from reasoning paths, source sentences, andPubMed searches was contradictory, making it challenging to determine the exact causal role of anemia. Thiscomplexity and contradiction provided an opportunity to achieve one of the sub-goals of the paper (H3), which wasto examine the causal roles of identified variables through the interpretation and evaluation of reasoning paths.Anemia is scientifically interesting as it has been reported to have complex relationships with bothdepression and Alzheimer's disease. While anemia has been reported as a risk factor for depression, some studieshave also suggested that depression may lead to anemia. Similarly, while anemia has been reported to increase therisk of Alzheimer's disease, other studies have suggested that Alzheimer's disease may lead to anemia.In order to provide a more nuanced understanding of the relationship between anemia and depression, andAlzheimer's disease, it was important to examine anemia in detail. This examination allowed for the exploration ofthe reasoning paths and the evaluation of the causal roles of anemia, depression, and Alzheimer's disease, therebycontributing to the overall goal of the paper (H3) to provide mechanistic explanations of the causal roles ofidentified variables.As noted previously in Results, anemia, a disease characterized by low hemoglobin levels, appears as a“mediator/collider” in the KG results but exclusively as a confounder in the SemMedDBComplete results. Table 6 showsthe support from SemMedDB for anemia causing depression was provided by two PREDISPOSES triples, and thesupport for anemia causing AD was supplied by a single CAUSES triple. In terms of conveying causative force,PREDISPOSES is weaker than CAUSES (see Rindflesch et al.127 for details) and implies that anemia may attenuated as arisk factor, or not well studied.Table 6. Support from SemMedDB for anemia as a confounder of depression as a risk factor for AD. The support isdivided into two components: (a.) the anemia→ depression component and (b.) the anemia → AD component.Support in the structured literature for anemia as a confounder for depression as a risk factor for AD(a.) Anemia -> DepressionPMIDTriplesSource text from titles and abstracts in the literatureComment22307099128Anemia PREDISPOSESdepressive disorderAnaemia predicted raised depression scores 3 weeks laterindependently of age, gender, marital status, educationalattainment, smoking, Global Registry of Acute CardiacEvents (GRACE) risk scores, the negative mood inThis study focused on a cohort of patients withacute coronary syndrome. Moreover, thisstatement insinuates a statistical prediction ratherthan a strictly causal role for anemia. However,38bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph32559605129Anemia PREDISPOSESdepressive disorderhospital and history of depression (p=0.003).the paper did find anemia to be predictive ofdepression.However, no safety signal regarding anemia for DNGusers could be detected, whereas a slight increase indepression risk cannot be excluded but might be explainedby baseline severity of endometriosis or unknowncountry-specific confounding variables.This paper was focused on hormonalendometriosis treatments rather than looking atanemia and depression directly. However,patients with anemia taking Dienogest (DNG) totreat endometriosis were at a slightly increasedrisk of developing depression, though this maybe partially explainable by confounding.(b.) Anemia -> ADPMIDTripleSentence29954452130Anemia CAUSES Alzheimer’sdiseaseRed blood cell indices and anemia as causative factors forcognitive function deficits and Alzheimer's diseaseSource text has a precise causal interpretation.This paper used Mendelian randomization usingUK BioBank data to investigate the relationshipbetween hemoglobin level and anemia andcognitive performance, concluding that therelationship was likely causal.Figures 12 and 13 present the support from the KG for anemia as a collider and mediator, respectively, ofthe depression and AD relationship.39bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphFigure 12. This figure shows the reasoning path support for depression causes anemia in (a.) and reasoning pathsupport for AD causes anemia in (b.), and shows the mediating role of IGF2 and AGT in the relationship betweendepression, AD, and anemia. Reasoning path support in the KG for anemia as a common effect or collider fordepression and AD. Both reasoning paths on the left (a.) and (b.) show how IGF2 mediates between depression andenvironmental exposures (e.g., perfluorooctanoic acid and bisphenol A) on the one hand and anemia on the other.Angiotensinogen (AGT) is the name of a gene and enzyme coded by that gene involved in blood pressure andmaintaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis131. Both reasoning paths on the right (a.) and (b.) show how AGTmediates between AD and the drugsareangiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, or (ACEIs), on the one hand, and anemia on the other. These drugs areknown to cause anemia132. Numerous studies indicate AD as a potential cause of anemia133,134.(a beta-blocker)and benazepriland enalaprilatenolol40bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphFigure 13. Support in the KG for anemia as a mediator for depression and AD. Note that (a.) contains the sameinformation as Figure 12 (a.). Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) promotes the proliferation andmigration of vascular endothelial cells and is upregulated in tumorogenesis135. VEGFA is also upregulated in AD136.As shown in Figure 13, anemia is indeed in a complex relationship. Bisphenol A, an endocrine disruptorand an everyday exposure, disrupts the iron cycle. Low iron decreases dopamine which causes low mood, anddepression causes brain atrophy associated with cognitive decline. Tentatively, our verdict is that anemia is apotential confounder and a mediator, though the evidence provided is not very strong.Searching PubMed, we found support for AD causing anemia with an adjusted OR = 3.41 (95% CI 1.68,6.92) reported in Faux et al.133, and was explained mechanistically with decreased plasma iron levels in AD134. Wealso found support for anemia causing AD. A recent paper using a robust study design explored the relationshipbetween anemia and AD137. The potential causal relationship between anemia and depression is well known138,139.Most surprisingly, we found support for depression causing anemia. Vulser et al. found a dose-response relationshipbetween depression severity and anemia140.41bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph4. DiscussionOur findings suggest that our novel causal feature selection method can identify plausible confounder,collider, and mediator variables for depression and AD (H1). A substantial number of variables, all conditions, werefound to play multiple roles. Surprisingly, only conditions appeared in all three roles. The extent to which specificcandidate confounders could behave in unexpected ways that violate the strict definition of confounding furtherconfirms the complexity of variables required for studying the relationship between depression and AD (H2). KGsearch produced interpretable mechanistic explanations in the form of reasoning paths (H3). Finally, the KG andSemMedDBComplete search results did not always agree about either the variables or the roles. There were potentiallyessential confounders identified by human content-matter experts that were not identified by our method. Note thatSemMedDB is not a reference standard and that the status of the variables identified can only be determined byexpert review. The clinical significance of identifying as yet unknown confounders is that these confounders may asyet be additional modifiable risk factors. For example, chronic infectious disease may be intervened upon via adultvaccination. There is a growing literature using large, retrospective reviews that adults vaccinated against commoninfectious agents (herpes zoster, hepatitis, tuberculosis) have a 25-45% lower risk of dementia141–145. The notion isthat adult vaccination “tunes up” the immune response to whatever causes AD, even if it is non-specific. The riskreduction is robust, and from large reviews that appear to have been corrected for SES status, health care, andeducation. Vitamin D deficiency and sleep apnea are also amenable to treatment and could independently modifyAD risk.In contrast to systems based on assertions from the literature, where source sentences providehuman-auditable provenance, the explanatory capability of KG search is provided by reasoning paths. The reasoningpaths provide supporting evidence by containing a trace of the nodes and predicates transverse in the course ofsearching the KG executing the SPARQL query. The reasoning pathway thus furnishes a mechanistic explanationthat is, in essence, a hypothesis or theory justifying the causal role(s) identified for that variable, filtered throughontology-grounded resources.The reasoning paths, which informally represent mechanistic hypotheses, seemed biologically plausibleupon inspection. Although there were problems with the reasoning paths from including generic nodes, we felt it hada strong explanation capability that could adequately clarify how variables were inferred from the source ontologies.42bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphA review by a human expert in AD confirmed that the variables identified by both the KG andSemMedDBComplete, including chronic infectious disease, obstructive sleep apnea, and vitamin D deficiency, werelikely confounders. However, in our inexhaustive, exemplary review of reported covariates from observationalstudies investigating depression and AD, these variables were not included. We interpret this to mean that the causalfeature selection method achieved a major objective in discovering unknown confounders beyond those reported inexisting observational studies. We also note the inconsistency in the reported covariates, indicating opportunities tostandardize confounder adjustment. Often, researchers only condition on variables for which they have data.Suppose there are known confounders for which data has not been collected. In that case, the opportunity is oftenmissed to inform future researchers of these variables is often missed since reporting on unmeasured confounders isnot standard practice in AD research. However, reporting on unmeasured confounders is often a helpful value-addedproposition if these variables are included visually in a DAG since such inclusion alerts future researchers of theneed to consider these variables in their models.In our comparative evaluation, comparing outputs between the KG and SemMedDBComplete, we found arelatively high concordance regarding the variables identified and the causal roles played by those variables. Wefound contradictions, and a significant portion of the KG and SemMedDBComplete search results did not co-occur. Apartial explanation is that the KG and the structured literature-derived knowledge derive from completely differentprocesses, origins, and purposes. The KG uses information derived from granular, ontology-grounded knowledge,while SemMedDB relies on the output of advanced NLP systems. Some concepts appeared in the KG that did notappear in SemMedDBComplete, e.g., inflammatory response (although a literature search produces promising evidencesupporting inflammatory response as a confounder146–150), and vice versa, e.g., leukoencephalopathy.SemMedDBComplete had a better recall of lifestyle-related confounders. The KG excelled at biological plausibility.Arguably, the KG and SemMedDBComplete complement one another in their coverage. SemMedDBComplete will have adifferent set of assertions than what MachineReadingDBScoped has or that make sense through the distillation processsearching the combined KG. These different sets of assertions can contradict one another, resulting in topologies forthe variables/nodes that reflect those contradictory assertions. Of this information, it is not known what is erroneousor not until these components undergo verification by human experts.43bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphHuman experts suggested reasonable confounders not included in the KG search results. For example, twoexternal correspondents with backgrounds in neurology noted two important confounders missing from the list ofconfounders identified by the KG and the literature: pesticides and adverse childhood experiences. The scoping ofthe literature also likely impacted the results. For example, the pesticide was present when searchingSemMedDBComplete. In addition, childhood trauma has been noted as a potential risk factor for depression and AD151.However, “adverse childhood event” was missing from SemMedDBComplete, further suggesting the importance of ahuman-in-the-loop process for identifying potential confounders.To the best of our knowledge, the literature has identified covariates that act as either confounder/mediatorsor confounder/colliders, but not all three roles, i.e., “the chimera.” We verified the plausibility of stroke as anexample of a chimera for depression and AD. Since chimeras are a new category of variable, no work to our presentknowledge has been performed to identify chimeras explicitly.4.1 Related WorkThere is vast, and still growing, literature on integrating and using forms of computable biomedicalknowledge. For example, related work has been done in defining ontologies for representing knowledge forneurodegenerative diseases78, identifying erroneous information by applying transitive closure over causalpredicates78, modeling argument structure152, detecting contradictions in statements extracted from the literature153,154,drug repurposing pipelines32,33,35,155,156, and elucidating mechanisms in systems and molecular biology40. Simply put,the vast body of tangentially related work would be impossible to condense. However, in the interest of space, sincethat literature is so vast, we will confine the discussion to a review of related work regardless of application area onthe problem of pruning spurious nodes resulting from erroneous information.The uncritical use of computable knowledge can result in a causal graph with low precision35. Thus, thedevelopment of methods for filtering out erroneous information is arguably a major hindrance to automating causalfeature selection and has spurred much creativity in developing novel approaches to address this problem. Forexample, Hu et al. used information from authoritative ontologies to orient the edges of a graphical causal modelstudying risk factors for AD36. In the approach of Nordon et al., edges were removed if the variables were notcorrelated in their corpus of electronic medical record data35. The incompleteness of knowledge was another major44bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphproblem, and approaches exist that attempt to solve both problems by using concept similarity measures to filter outerroneous edges, while inferring new edges. Zhang et al. report using neural graph embedding methodPubMedBioBert33. Malec et al. used cutoff scores for string-based and vector-based confounder search63,157.Our novel causal feature selection method builds on and differs from previous research in the followingregards. In contrast to the previous work, our method combines the breadth of literature-derived information withthe precision of ontology-grounded resources. In addition, we introduce refinements to confounder search thatallows us to identify a comprehensive set of variables with which to adjust without inducing bias (by identifying andfiltering out potential colliders and mediators).The present work builds on the ideas from literature-based discovery, an area pioneered by Don Swansonand Neil R. Smallheiser158–161. Originating in the field of literature-based discovery, an essential notion of ourapproach relies on the idea of a discovery pattern, or the use of semantic constraints to yield potentially interestinghypotheses158,159. The first discovery patterns were manually constructed patterns noticed by observing recurringrelationships between concepts62,162. More recently, new applications for discovery patterns have been identified, andmethods have been developed to infer discovery patterns automatically163,164. Discovery patterns can be and havebeen implemented in any query or knowledge representation language that considers how concepts relate to oneanother, including SPARQL165, SQL166, and advanced methods for querying distributed semanticrepresentations63,157,167,168 of structured knowledge.Related to the present work, in its explanatory aspect, would be a paper by Elsworth et al. usingliterature-derived triples to identify intermediate concepts169. However, the objective of their paper was focused onidentifying mediating mechanisms from a theoretical perspective rather than the context of identifying contextualknowledge relevant to data-driven studies. Other notable work related to an explanation would be the EpiphaNetproject, an interactive knowledge discovery system developed by Cohen et al.170 EpiphaNet allows scientists tonavigate relationships that interest them visually and interactively.Other prior work has applied structure learning methods to observational data to recapitulate known andunknown edges between the biomedical entities under the models171, and provide automated cogent explanatorypaths relating to drugs and adverse events29.45bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph4.2 Strengths and limitationsA significant strength of the present work was utilizing ontology-grounded knowledge resources in the KG.The ontology-grounded KG helped prune erroneous information and provide mechanistic explanations in the formof reasoning paths that describe how the variables identified were related to depression and AD.A methodological limitation may have arisen in our search procedure. In the interest of search efficiency,we constrained the max length of our search. The KG search also identified genes, enzymes, and drug exposures aspotential confounders. However, the KG search only produced output for phenotypes playing collider and mediatorroles. Hence, for illustration purposes, our analysis focused primarily on confounders that were conditions orphenotypes. We suspect that the threshold applied to limit search depth may have constrained the results, resulting inlower recall than a deeper search in these categories. Several variables in these categories were recapitulated in ourliterature review in Table 5, e.g., homocysteine, and APOEɛ4 carrier status.The present study successfully incorporated output from different machine reading systems with distinctbut complementary purposes, beginning with their respective focus domains. For example, SemRep excels atextracting pharmacogenomic172 and clinical knowledge, whereas INDRA/REACH excels with detailed mechanisticknowledge of proteins, thus facilitating the linkage between detailed mechanistic and clinical knowledge. However,we could not capitalize on this knowledge because of imperfect terminology mapping. This form of information lossarises when a concept appears in the source terminology that is missing in the target. As seen in the PRISMAdiagram in Figure 4, many concepts identified in the literature were lost in translation undergoing the terminologymapping procedure. There was also information loss because of a lack of granularity in the mappings we were ableto find. For example, all of the post-translational modifications were mapped to the predicateBIOMOLECULARLY_INTERACTS_WITH, which is not unidirectional in its meaning: molecularly interacts with isassociational. As a result, we may have lost information about directionality in some of the predicates. In othercases, inferences may have been erroneous.Erroneous inferences may arise from errors inherited from the machine reading systems or theontology-grounded knowledge in the KG. This is because our causal feature selection approach relies on KG searchand KG search depends on the information from the machine reading systems and the ontologies. However, note that46bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphthe errors inherent in the machine reading systems are distinct from the errors in downstream applications, i.e.,causal modeling. For more specifics on machine reading system-specific errors, Ahlers et al. discussespharmacogenomic predications172, while Rindflesch discusses difficulties extracting predications concerning theetiology of disease127. For approaches for post-processing machine reading outputs that address erroneous outputsand other aspects of knowledge hygiene, see Holtsapple et al. 33 for a post-processing workflow for INDRA andZhang et al.33 for a post-processing workflow for SemRep predications.It is important to acknowledge the limitations of the mapping process and the need for further optimizationto improve its performance in future studies. The mapping of INDRA concepts to UMLS using MetaMap resulted ina concept loss. Many unmapped concepts were non-biological terms or abbreviations that could not bedisambiguated without the source texts. Reduced accuracy in the presence of ambiguity is a known limitation ofMetaMap68.We also speculate that the poor performance of this mapping process may be partially explained by amismatch between the general-purpose biomedical free-text use case for MetaMap68,173 and the unique sublanguagerequired for post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins. Drawing on the work of Zellig Harris174, Friedmandefined a sublanguage as a language that is used in a specific domain or field of expertise, which may have its ownunique vocabulary and syntax175. Similarly, Rindflesch and Fiszman discussed the importance of consideringsublanguage when developing NLP tools for biomedical texts176. Hence, MetaMap was not as successful atrecognizing and resolving semantically ambiguous concepts in the PTM domain as the INDRA/REACH NLPsystem, which was specifically designed to recognize concepts (and predicates) in the PTM domain.In addition, the current implementation of PheKnowLator in mapping from UMLS to OBO ontologies (seeListing 1) may have also resulted in a loss of mappings, leading to less complete explanations and collider,confounder, and mediators in KG search results. This is because PheKnowLator only includes patterns that haveOBO mappings in its path searches. While acceptable as a proof of concept, where the focus is on feasibility, thislimitation highlights the need for further work to improve and expand the mappings and evaluate the performancecharacteristics of the mapping processes. A detailed list of triples and mappings is available for the interested readerfor further examination. The semantic types of mapped and unmapped terms can be analyzed by comparing the47bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphmapping tables (see File VII. Appendix_C.docx) and querying the UMLS MRSTY tables (available at this link:https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/licensedcontent/umlsknowledgesources.html).Errors from the machine reading NLP can take different forms and result in causal models that are eitherincomplete, inaccurate or both, resulting from differential confounder misclassification177. Either inaccuracies orincompleteness of information can lead to bias from omitting an important confounder or adjusting for a combinedrole variable. For example, residual bias from not conditioning on an important confounder or omitted variablebias20, and differential conclusions. Similarly, a missing collider relationship can result in collider-stratification biasif the variable is adjusted for. In simulation studies, this bias can range from 10-15% (or more) in either direction178.On the other hand, if a variable is adjusted for as a confounder when its other role as a mediator relationship is notidentified, overadjustment bias179 or treatment-confounder feedback bias may result. In this scenario, the measure ofeffect or association tends to be biased toward the null, since the mediator is an aspect of the causal effect of theexposure. Fortunately, appropriate estimation methods designed for these settings, such as G-methods180,181 andIPTW182–185 can be utilized to address these challenges.Finally, bias of unpredictable direction can arise from a combination of incompleteness and inaccuracies inmachine reading and the ontologies, depending on the nature and strength of the variables. However, residual biasmay remain from not adjusting for these problematic variables.Science is not infallible, and establishing ground truth is a contentious process. Erroneous conclusions maybe drawn from undiagnosed bias from confounding bias7, selection bias, measurement error bias186, missingdata21,187, or a combination of some or all of the above. For example, selection bias can result from restrictions on thestudy population, such as inclusion/exclusion criteria based on healthcare utilization (a collider),188–190 or on aprognostic test (even if the prognostic does not affect the outcome, and is not a collider).191Another limitation that inheres in both forms of structured knowledge we used in this study. It is alsoessential to consider not just the accuracy and completeness of the structured knowledge for causal feature selectionbut also the transportability of the causal relationships identified when interpreting the results of a study192–194. Inother words, it is also important to consider cases when the structured knowledge is accurate, but the causalrelationship identified by the study is not transportable to the target population. For example, the relationshipbetween a risk factor and a disease may be accurately identified in a study population but may not hold true in a48bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphpopulation with different demographics, such as age, gender, or ethnic background195,196. Similarly, the accuracy of acausal relationship may be impacted by differences in how the variables are measured and categorized. For example,a relationship between a risk factor and a disease may be identified in a study using self-reported data but may nothold true when the same relationship is assessed using objective measures. Furthermore, the non-transportability ofcausal relationships may also arise from differences in the underlying causal structure of the populations, giving riseto heterogeneous treatment effects197. For example, a causal relationship identified in a study population may resultfrom a common cause that is not present in the target population, such as shared environmental exposure, or viceversa. Finally, factors such as the distribution of confounding variables, measurement and categorization ofvariables, and underlying causal structure should be carefully considered when extrapolating the findings to otherpopulations.Another limitation was the small size of the literature corpus and the small size likely had inadvertentnegative side effects on the recall of variables and roles. Also, since we scoped the inputs from the literature-derivedcomputable knowledge to focus exclusively on AD (the outcome) and the identification of confounders and otherroles requires comprehensive knowledge of both the exposure (depression) and outcome mechanisms, we likelymissed titles having to do with our exposure, depression, limiting the ability to identify confounders. A larger andmore representative sample of the knowledge in the literature could partially address the missing bits of knowledge.There is always the risk of latent and unmeasured confounding regardless of the causal feature selectionmethod. Knowledge, like all things human, is never complete or perfect. Both in spite of and because of thesecaveats, computational tools for causal feature selection are critical for simplifying the task of exploring the causalstructure underlying scientific questions and for identifying more comprehensive, robust, and plausibly valid featuresets than is traditionally possible.4.3 Future directionsAutomated visualization of KG search output. In the present work, we built the diagrams manually. Infuture work, we will develop tools that automatically compile and generate causal graphs and reasoning pathdiagrams after collecting requirements from human content experts. Explanatory power and ease of use are criticalfor engaging with and obtaining a clearer view of the status of human content-matter experts. Additional work is49bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphalso needed regarding how to best gather input from human content-matter experts concerning variables identifiedvia our workflow to derive a reference standard for a subset of modifiable risk factors. An automated explanationcapability would significantly facilitate the investigation of causal feature selection methods to facilitate review.The manual verification exercises demonstrated how KG and structured literature search could be fruitfullycombined with manual review searching PubMed to adjudicate KG search output.However, human experts would likely require more than just source sentences to classify variables by thecausal roles of identified variables. To optimize the transportability of causal findings from the literature andontology-grounded information to inform epidemiological studies, more work needs to be done to collect meta-datafor causal assertions, including information about study characteristics, whether derived from observational studies,RCTs, or GWAS assays. The Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions providesrecommendations on data collection of characteristics of observational studies to assess the transportability of theirfindings198. In this vain, recent work199 highlighted a workflow for assessing the quality of confounding control inobservational studies included in meta-analyses. Efforts collecting a field-specific database of confounders arefoundational for evaluating outputs from structured knowledge. However, it will also be important to gatherinformation on mediators and colliders. Mediators are particularly important if they are also confounders, as suchvariables may be CAPTs17, mentioned earlier. However, few papers report these types of variables, unless the studyis focusing on estimating effects in the context of time-varying confounders.The estimation of multiple concurrent exposures is a slowly emerging topic200–202. In this paper, we focusedon understanding the complexities of a single exposure, depression. We did not explore the causal feature selectionfor scenarios with multiple concurrent exposures, While there is some existing research on joint treatment effects,the emphasis has been on estimation procedures rather than causal feature selection. However, we have begun toconsider the implications of considering complex exposure regimes in preliminary concurrent work.We briefly describe a knowledge-based procedure for handling the technicalities of multiple concurrentexposures, a slowly emerging topic relevant to public health aspects of AD research. Returning to our original usecase, consider depression and an anti-depressant treatment for depression to be the joint/multiple (concurrent)exposures with outcome AD. To estimate the effect of these exposures on AD, we first identify and adjust forconfounders that affect each exposure and the outcome. Confounders for each exposure-outcome relationship should50bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphbe selected separately by identifying variables that affect the exposure and outcome. For depression and AD,potential confounders could include age, sex, education, and genetic risk factors for AD. For anti-depressant use andAD, confounders could include the severity of depression, comorbidities, and prior medication use203,204. We thencombine both of these confounders into a single graph. Note that certain confounders will be unique to oneexposure, and other variables will be common to both.A popular way to handle confounders that are unique to each exposure when estimating causal effects isthrough marginal structural models (MSMs)184,205,206. Standard adjustment methods, including multivariate logisticregression, fail in such scenarios. MSMs allow for the estimation of the total effect of joint treatment whilecontrolling for the confounding effects of each exposure. Time-varying confounders that may be uniquely associatedwith depression and AD could include changes in cognitive function51,207–209 over time. Cognitive function could alsobe a time-varying confounder as it may both affect and be influenced by depression and, in turn, may affecttreatment decisions and outcomes. In contrast, time-varying confounders that may be uniquely associated withanti-depressant use and AD could include changes in the severity of depression and medication adherence over time.Certain other confounders could be common to both exposures, e.g., sociodemographic characteristics like age, race,and gender. Both unique and common confounders should be included in the analysis to control for their effects.Unique confounders for each exposure can be handled by including them in the weighting function, which balancesthe distribution of the confounders across treatment groups. Time-fixed confounders, e.g., APOEε2/3/4 status 210–212)can be included as covariates, while time-varying confounders can be handled using IPTW15,184,213,214 orG-methods15,16,180,181,215. Readers interested in a more detailed discussion of diagnostic approaches for addressingjoint exposures and time-varying confounding in research methods may refer to Jackson's work15. By consideringmultiple exposures, we can capture a more comprehensive picture of the complex interplay between various riskfactors and treatment outcomes, ultimately leading to more precise and effective interventions tailored to individualsubgroups.Returning to the public health question, more reliable estimation of joint treatment effects has the potentialto significantly enhance our ability to identify heterogeneous treatment effects within subgroups and optimizeinterventions for their effect by subgroup on modifiable risk factors, and explored in greater detail by Barnes et al.216. Finally, in parallel work, we are working on a method addressing the problem of “M”-bias. “M”-bias is a type of51bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphcollider bias, wherein the bias is amplified by inducing a spurious dependency between the exposure and theoutcome conditioning on a collider217,218. In “M”-bias, there are confounders that are themselves effects of two ormore other confounders. To reduce bias in this scenario, causal relationships between the confounders must beconsidered.4.4 Practical ImplicationsThe variables in the “Confounders only” category in Figure 11 could be said to be a potentially strongstarting point for adjustment sets. These concepts fulfill the definition of a confounder as a mutual cause of theexposure (depression) and the outcome (AD) of interest without being effects of either depression or AD and havebeen vetted by two distinct causal feature selection methods but require review by human content-matter experts.Yet, all hope is not lost for confounders that play multiple roles. Here, we briefly consider how to handleconfounders that also might play other roles, e.g., colliders or mediators. When a variable is both a confounder and acollider, adjusting for it based on data measured before the exposure may still result in collider-stratificationbias23,219. This occurs because adjusting for a collider affects the relationship between the exposure and the outcomeand may introduce bias into the estimated effect. A common, though incorrect, approach to prevent collider bias is toinclude only covariates measured before the exposure. However, this approach may still not fully address the issueof collider-stratification bias220.Instead, a more thorough and careful approach may be necessary, such as using causal inference techniques,such as propensity score matching methods, e.g., IPTW182–185, to adjust for the selection bias induced by the collider,or adjusting for other variables that can block the collider pathway. In the latter case, knowledge of the causalstructure and measure of the other variable is required. In addition, sensitivity analyses may be conducted to assessthe results' robustness to the adjustment method. Nevertheless, the decision on whether to adjust for a variable that isboth a confounder and a collider should be based on a thorough understanding of the underlying causal mechanismsand relationships between the variables and a critical evaluation of the potential sources of bias and confounding.Regardless of the estimation method, sensitivity analyses and diagnostics are recommended for the best results.Illuminating further discussion on sensitivity analysis when collider-stratification bias is suspected is discussed in apaper by Kennedy and Balakrishnan7.52bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphRecent work has advocated for the development of processes for the systematic review of potentialconfounders by content-matter experts with the objective of the creation of field-specific databases of confounders222and routinely reporting causal DAGs containing all known confounders in observational research222. Tennant et al.suggest reporting variables measured in observational studies and variables that researchers would have liked tohave measured but for which they had not collected data in their current study223. They also suggest using astandardized format to report causal DAGs such as DAGitty224. Such reporting standards, employing FAIR (fair,accessible, interoperable, and reusable) data principles225, ensure shareability and, if adopted, could makeobservational studies more rigorous and reproducible and allow researchers to build more concretely on each other’swork, making advances with each iteration to answer difficult causal questions from large sets of non-randomizedpatient health data “across sites and studies” as suggested by Blum et al.222. Iteratively building on the knowledge ofconfounders could spur advance in AD studies, perform informed sensitivity analyses, and quantify the extent of“unknown unknowns” using the e-value metric222,226,227. The e-value metric essentially quantifies the prevalence theconfounder would need to have to explain away an association, as per the classic study of Cornfield et al. onsmoking and lung cancer228–231.Observational studies that employ a more comprehensive, refined adjustment set and standardization ofadjustment sets by expert review could improve the rigor of observational studies (by standardizing adjustment, apoint raised above) and bolster the precision of causal effect estimates. This information could then be applied tofacilitate causal inference at scale over large centralized and federated data stores, such as PCORnet232,233 andAll_of_Us234.Lastly, the following bullet points represent the contributions of this work: (1.) contributes information onpotential confounders to consider when designing rigorous observational studies of depression and AD; (2.) providesexplanatory reasoning paths providing mechanistic hypotheses for the causal edges identified; and (3.) shows howsemantic and causal inference can be partially combined.5. ConclusionIn summary, our study has demonstrated the potential of utilizing knowledge graphs (KG) to identifypotential confounding, colliding, and mediating variables in the relationship between depression as an exposure and53bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphAD as an outcome. Our methodology has partially addressed the limitations of literature-derived structuredknowledge by distilling it through ontology-grounded knowledge in a KG. Our findings have revealed that KGsoffer an efficient way to represent and automate reasoning over knowledge, leading to the generation of mechanistichypotheses concerning biomolecular processes underlying confounders. Moreover, our research has highlighted thatsemantic inference can enhance causal inference, though it requires further investigation.Ultimately, our work aims to answer epistemological questions. While depression and AD serve as a primeexample in our study, it is not the sole reason for our research. More research needs to be conducted on ouranalytical strategy to reach a definitive conclusion for this specific case. We anticipate that this work and futurestudies will progress the rigor of observational studies.The complexity of variables underscores the value of a combination of machine-human strategies, wheremachines can proficiently search for large-scale knowledge, linking clinical phenotypes with molecular processesand disease definitions. Human experts can focus on comprehending the appropriateness of identified variables intheir context, i.e., transportability. Computational tools that simplify access to knowledge can help scientists conductmore meticulous observational studies and prioritize public health interventions with greater confidence. Futurework is needed to enhance KG search for causal feature selection, and our methods can be effortlessly extended toother content areas.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information accompanies this paper as described below.Additional files: File I. Appendix_A.docx. Background S1. Logical properties. File II. Appendix_B.docx. ListingS1. PubMed scoping query. Table S1. Mappings for UMLS CUIs to RO. Table S2. UMLS CUI definitions fordepression and AD. Table S3. Complete analysis of KG search with SemMedDBs. Table S4. Comparison ofconfounders - search results belonging to the gene or enzyme, protein, or semantic categories. Table S5.Comparison of confounders - search results belonging to the drug or hormone semantic categories. Table S6.Comparison of phenotype/condition confounders playing simple roles. Table S7. Comparison ofphenotype/condition confounders playing combined roles. Figure S1.Venn diagram of complete results for allsemantic types for simple roles. Figure S2. Venn diagram of complete results for all semantic types for combinedroles. File III. AdjustmentSetDepression2AD.xlsx. Worksheet S1. Conditions. Worksheet S2. Substances.Worksheet S3. GenesEnzymes. File IV. predicatePropertyAnalysis.xlsx. This file contains our analysis of thelogical properties of symmetry and transitivity for the predicates from the machine reading systems. File V.ConfounderSourceSentences.xlsx. This file contains source sentences for three potential confounders that have notbeen reported as covariates in published observational studies looking at depression and AD. File VI.ChimeraSourceSentences.xlsx. This file contains source sentences for stroke as a chimeric variable for depressionand AD. File VII. Appendix_C.docx. This file contains documentation for access the Zenodo archive containingJupyter notebooks for knowledge hygiene operations (terminology mapping and logical closure), the SPARQLqueries and raw output from running the queries, and the SemMedDB queries. File VIII.54bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphMDD2ADandDementia-v1.0.xlsx. This file contains a pilot metareview of confounders collected from reportedconfounders in published studies.Acknowledgments:The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions and challenging comments thatimproved the paper. We would also like to thank health sciences librarian Helena M. VonVille for assisting indesigning the PubMed query to scope the literature. Previous versions of this paper benefited from the suggestionsand comments of Professors Gregory F. Cooper, Andrew Stern, and Howard Aizenstein. We would also like torecognize Elizabeth Wu of Alzforum (http://www.alzforum.org) for discussion regarding previous versions of thispaper. Thanks to Sarah Wenyon for proofreading. SAM takes responsibility for all errors.FundingThe US National Library of Medicine grants supported this research, including 5 T15 LM007059-32 and K99LM013367-01A1; US National Institutes of Aging grant T32 AG055381; and the University of Pittsburgh’sMomentum Funds. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Library ofMedicine of the National Institutes of Health.Availability of data and materialsThe data supporting these findings are available from this project's Zenodo repository(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6785307). No restrictions apply to the public availability of these data.Authors' ContributionsSAM had full access to all of the data in this study and took full responsibility for the integrity and accuracy of thedata analysis. RDB supervised the study. SBT and RDB conceived of the graph querying methods with SAM’sinput. RDB and SAM conceived and executed the initial study design and SAM analyzed the study data, interpretedstudy findings, and drafted the manuscript along with RDB. TJC provided invaluable input in constructing the KG.SMA, CES, HTK, ASL, TJC, PWM, and RDB critically reviewed drafts of the manuscript. The correspondingauthor attests that all listed authors meet the authorship criteria and that no other meeting the criteria have beenomitted. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.References1. Cartwright N. Are RCTs the Gold Standard? BioSocieties [Internet]. 2007 Mar [cited 2017 Jul 21];2(1):11–20.Available from: http://www.palgrave-journals.com/doifinder/10.1017/S17458552070050292. VanderWeele TJ, Shpitser I. On the definition of a confounder. Ann Stat. 2013 Feb;41(1):196–220.3. VanderWeele TJ. Principles of confounder selection. Eur J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2019 Aug20];34(3):211–9. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6447501/4. Arntzenius F. Reichenbach’s Common Cause Principle. In: Zalta EN, editor. The Stanford Encyclopedia ofPhilosophy [Internet]. Fall 2010. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University; 2010 [cited 2019 Dec 10]. p.1. Available from: https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2010/entries/physics-Rpcc/5. VanderWeele TJ, Shpitser I. A new criterion for confounder selection. Biometrics [Internet]. 2011Dec;67(4):1406–13. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/216276307.6. Groenwold RHH, Sterne JAC, Lawlor DA, Moons KGM, Hoes AW, Tilling K. Sensitivity analysis for theeffects of multiple unmeasured confounders. Ann Epidemiol [Internet]. 2016 Sep 1 [cited 2020 Sep20];26(9):605–11. Available from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1047279716302253Pearl J. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference [Internet]. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress; 2009 [cited 2017 Jul 21]. Available from: http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ref/id/CBO9780511803161Patorno E, Glynn RJ, Hernandez-Diaz S, Liu J, Schneeweiss S. Studies with many covariates and fewoutcomes: selecting covariates and implementing propensity-score-based confounding adjustments. EpidemiolCamb Mass. 2014 Mar;25(2):268–78.8.9. Talbot D, Diop A, Lavigne-Robichaud M, Brisson C. The change in estimate method for selecting confounders:55bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphA simulation study. Stat Methods Med Res. 2021 Sep;30(9):2032–44.10. Variable Selection for Confounding Adjustment in High-dimensional Covariate Spaces When AnalyzingHealthcare Databases. Vol. 28. United States; 2017.11. Shpitser I, VanderWeele T, Robins JM. On the Validity of Covariate Adjustment for Estimating Causal Effects.:10.12. MEDLINE PubMed Production Statistics [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; [cited 2022 Jul 3].Available from: https://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/medline_pubmed_production_stats.html13. Hernan MA, Robins JM. Causal Inference [Internet]. Taylor & Francis; 2017. (Chapman & Hall/CRCMonographs on Statistics & Applied Probab). Available from:https://books.google.com/books?id=_KnHIAAACAAJ14. Karim ME, Tremlett H, Zhu F, Petkau J, Kingwell E. Dealing with Treatment-confounder Feedback and SparseFollow-up in Longitudinal studies - Application of a Marginal Structural Model in a Multiple Sclerosis Cohort.Am J Epidemiol. 2020 Oct 30;15. Jackson JW. Diagnostics for confounding of time-varying and other joint exposures. Epidemiol Camb Mass[Internet]. 2016 Nov [cited 2020 May 10];27(6):859–69. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5308856/16. Robins J, Hernan M. Estimation of the causal effects of time-varying exposure. In: Longitudinal Data Analysis.2008. p. 553–99.17. Pega F, Blakely T, Glymour MM, Carter KN, Kawachi I. Using Marginal Structural Modeling to Estimate theCumulative Impact of an Unconditional Tax Credit on Self-Rated Health. Am J Epidemiol. 2016 Feb15;183(4):315–24.18. Sackett DL. Bias in analytic research. J Chronic Dis. 1979;32(1–2):51–63.19. Elwert F, Winship C. Endogenous Selection Bias: The Problem of Conditioning on a Collider Variable. AnnuRev Sociol [Internet]. 2014 Jul;40:31–53. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3011190420. Steiner PM, Kim Y. The Mechanics of Omitted Variable Bias: Bias Amplification and Cancellation ofOffsetting Biases. J Causal Inference [Internet]. 2016 Sep;4(2):20160009. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3012373221. Abrahamowicz M, Bjerre LM, Beauchamp ME, LeLorier J, Burne R. The missing cause approach tounmeasured confounding in pharmacoepidemiology. Stat Med. 2016 Mar 30;35(7):1001–16.22. Grätz M. When Less Conditioning Provides Better Estimates: Overcontrol and Collider Bias in Research onIntergenerational Mobility [Internet]. Working Paper Series. Stockholm University, Swedish Institute for SocialResearch; 2019 Jun [cited 2020 Jun 16]. (Working Paper Series). Report No.: 2/2019. Available from:https://ideas.repec.org/p/hhs/sofiwp/2019_002.html23. Cole SR, Platt RW, Schisterman EF, Chu H, Westreich D, Richardson D, et al. Illustrating bias due toconditioning on a collider. Int J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2010 Apr;39(2):417–20. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1992666724. Banack HR, Kaufman JS. From bad to worse: collider stratification amplifies confounding bias in the “obesityparadox”. Eur J Epidemiol. 2015 Oct;30(10):1111–4.25. Funk C, Baumgartner W, Garcia B, Roeder C, Bada M, Cohen KB, et al. Large-scale biomedical conceptrecognition: an evaluation of current automatic annotators and their parameters. BMC Bioinformatics[Internet]. 2014 Feb 26 [cited 2023 Feb 25];15(1):59. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-15-5926. Mower J, Subramanian D, Shang N, Cohen T. Classification-by-Analogy: Using Vector Representations ofImplicit Relationships to Identify Plausibly Causal Drug/Side-effect Relationships. AMIA Annu Symp ProcAMIA Symp. 2016;2016:1940–9.27. Mower J, Cohen T, Subramanian D. Complementing Observational Signal with Literature-derived DistributedRepresentations for Post-marketing Drug Surveillance. Drug Saf [Internet]. 2020 Jan [cited 2020 Sep17];43(1):67–77. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7243821/28. Mower J, Subramanian D, Cohen T. Learning predictive models of drug side-effect relationships fromdistributed representations of literature-derived semantic predications. J Am Med Inform Assoc [Internet]. 2018Jul 11;ocy077–ocy077. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocy07729. Shang N, Xu H, Rindflesch TC, Cohen T. Identifying plausible adverse drug reactions using knowledgeextracted from the literature. J Biomed Inform. 2014 Dec;52:293–310.30. Fathiamini S, Johnson AM, Zeng J, Araya A, Holla V, Bailey AM, et al. Automated identification of moleculareffects of drugs (AIMED). J Am Med Inform Assoc JAMIA. 2016 Jul;23(4):758–65.56bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph31. Cohen T, Widdows D, De Vine L, Schvaneveldt R, Rindflesch TC. Many Paths Lead to Discovery: AnalogicalRetrieval of Cancer Therapies. In: Busemeyer JR, Dubois F, Lambert-Mogiliansky A, Melucci M, editors.Quantum Interaction. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2012. p. 90–101. (Lecture Notes in Computer Science).32. Nordon G, Koren G, Shalev V, Horvitz E, Radinsky K. Separating Wheat from Chaff: Joining BiomedicalKnowledge and Patient Data for Repurposing Medications. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell [Internet]. 2019 Jul 17[cited 2020 Mar 5];33(01):9565–72. Available from: https://aaai.org/ojs/index.php/AAAI/article/view/501733. Zhang R, Hristovski D, Schutte D, Kastrin A, Fiszman M, Kilicoglu H. Drug repurposing for COVID-19 viaknowledge graph completion. J Biomed Inform. 2021 Mar;115:103696.34. Müller HM, Kenny EE, Sternberg PW. Textpresso: An Ontology-Based Information Retrieval and ExtractionSystem for Biological Literature. PLoS Biol [Internet]. 2004 Nov [cited 2022 Jul 4];2(11):e309. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC517822/35. Nordon G, Koren G, Shalev V, Kimelfeld B, Shalit U, Radinsky K. Building Causal Graphs from MedicalLiterature and Electronic Medical Records. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell [Internet]. 2019 Jul 17 [cited 2022 Jun1];33(01):1102–9. Available from: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/390236. Hu H, Kerschberg L. Improved Causal Models of Alzheimer’s Disease. In: 2021 IEEE 45th Annual Computers,Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC). 2021. p. 274–83.37. Besnard P, Cordier M o, Moinard Y. Inferring Causal Explanations. Hunt Parsons Eds. 1999;99:55–67.38. Friedman S, Magnusson I, Sarathy V, Schmer-Galunder S. From Unstructured Text to Causal KnowledgeGraphs: A Transformer-Based Approach. ArXiv220211768 Cs [Internet]. 2022 Feb 23 [cited 2022 Feb 25];Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.1176839. Thomas PD, Hill DP, Mi H, Osumi-Sutherland D, Van Auken K, Carbon S, et al. Gene Ontology CausalActivity Modeling (GO-CAM) moves beyond GO annotations to structured descriptions of biological functionsand systems. Nat Genet [Internet]. 2019 Oct [cited 2021 Aug 15];51(10):1429–33. Available from:https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-019-0500-140. Tripodi IJ, Callahan TJ, Westfall JT, Meitzer NS, Dowell RD, Hunter LE. Applying knowledge-drivenmechanistic inference to toxicogenomics. Toxicol Vitro Int J Publ Assoc BIBRA. 2020 Aug;66:104877.41. Sarvet AL, Stensrud MJ. Without Commitment to an Ontology, There Could Be No Causal Inference.Epidemiology [Internet]. 2022 May [cited 2022 Jun 5];33(3):372–8. Available from:https://journals.lww.com/epidem/Citation/2022/05000/Without_Commitment_to_an_Ontology,_There_Could_Be.9.aspx42. Liu K, Hogan WR, Crowley RS. Natural Language Processing methods and systems for biomedical ontologylearning. J Biomed Inform. 2011 Feb;44(1):163–79.43. Kejriwal M. Domain-Specific Knowledge Graph Construction [Internet]. Springer International Publishing;2019. Available from: https://books.google.com/books?id=naHrvwEACAAJ44. Vos T, Lim SS, Abbafati C, Abbas KM, Abbasi M, Abbasifard M, et al. Global burden of 369 diseases andinjuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of DiseaseStudy 2019. The Lancet [Internet]. 2020 Oct 17 [cited 2021 Sep 29];396(10258):1204–22. Available from:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014067362030925945. Komarova NL, Thalhauser CJ. High Degree of Heterogeneity in Alzheimer’s Disease Progression Patterns.PLOS Comput Biol [Internet]. 2011 Nov 3 [cited 2019 Oct 2];7(11):e1002251. Available from:https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.100225146. Association AP. DSM 5 Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. DSM 5 Diagn Stat Man MentDisord [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2022 Mar 13];947 p.-947 p. Available from:https://pesquisa.bvsalud.org/portal/resource/pt/psa-5282647. Bains N, Abdijadid S. Major Depressive Disorder. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearlsPublishing; 2022 [cited 2022 Jun 5]. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK559078/48. Cai N, Choi KW, Fried EI. Reviewing the genetics of heterogeneity in depression: operationalizations,manifestations and etiologies. Hum Mol Genet [Internet]. 2020 Sep 30 [cited 2021 Sep 28];29(R1):R10–8.Available from: https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaa11549. Karim HT. The Elusive “White Whale” of Treatment Response Prediction: Leveraging the Curse ofHeterogeneity in Late-Life Depression. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry Off J Am Assoc Geriatr Psychiatry. 2021 Apr9;S1064-7481(21)00288-8.50. Devi G, Scheltens P. Heterogeneity of Alzheimer’s disease: consequence for drug trials? Alzheimers Res Ther[Internet]. 2018 Dec 19 [cited 2019 Oct 2];10. Available from:57bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphhttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6300886/51. Butters MA, Young JB, Lopez O, Aizenstein HJ, Mulsant BH, Reynolds CF, et al. Pathways linking late-lifedepression to persistent cognitive impairment and dementia. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2008;10(3):345–57.52. Koenig AM, Bhalla RK, Butters MA. Cognitive functioning and late-life depression. J Int Neuropsychol SocJINS. 2014 May;20(5):461–7.53. Livingston G, Huntley J, Sommerlad A, Ames D, Ballard C, Banerjee S, et al. Dementia prevention,intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet Lond Engl. 2020 Aug8;396(10248):413–46.54. COVID-19 Mental Disorders Collaborators. Global prevalence and burden of depressive and anxiety disordersin 204 countries and territories in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet Lond Engl. 2021 Nov6;398(10312):1700–12.55. Kilicoglu H, Rosemblat G, Fiszman M, Shin D. Broad-coverage biomedical relation extraction with SemRep.BMC Bioinformatics [Internet]. 2020 May 14 [cited 2020 May 26];21(1):188. Available from:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-020-3517-756. Kilicoglu H, Rosemblat G, Fiszman M, Rindflesch TC. Constructing a semantic predication gold standard fromthe biomedical literature. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Dec 20;12:486.57. Rindflesch TC, Blake CL, Fiszman M, Kilicoglu H, Rosemblat G, Schneider J, et al. Informatics Support forBasic Research in Biomedicine. ILAR J [Internet]. 2017 Jul 1 [cited 2019 Aug 5];58(1):80–9. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5886329/58. Gyori BM, Bachman JA, Subramanian K, Muhlich JL, Galescu L, Sorger PK. From word models to executablemodels of signaling networks using automated assembly. Mol Syst Biol [Internet]. 2017 Nov 24 [cited 2020Aug 14];13(11). Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5731347/59. VanderWeele T. Explanation in Causal Inference: Methods for Mediation and Interaction [Internet]. OxfordUniversity Press; 2015. Available from: https://books.google.com/books?id=K6cgBgAAQBAJ60. Aalen OO, Roysland K, Gran JM, Ledergerber B. Causality, mediation and time: a dynamic viewpoint. J R StatSoc Ser A Stat Soc. 2012 Oct;175(4):831–61.61. Richiardi L, Bellocco R, Zugna D. Mediation analysis in epidemiology: methods, interpretation and bias. Int JEpidemiol. 2013 Oct;42(5):1511–9.62. Hristovski D, Friedman C, Rindflesch TC, Peterlin B. Exploiting semantic relations for literature-baseddiscovery. AMIA Annu Symp Proc AMIA Symp. 2006;349–53.63. Malec SA, Wei P, Bernstam EV, Boyce RD, Cohen T. Using computable knowledge mined from the literatureto elucidate confounders for EHR-based pharmacovigilance. J Biomed Inform [Internet]. 2021 May 1 [cited2021 Mar 31];117:103719. Available from:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S153204642100048464. Kilicoglu H, Shin D, Fiszman M, Rosemblat G, Rindflesch TC. SemMedDB: a PubMed-scale repository ofbiomedical semantic predications. Bioinforma Oxf Engl. 2012 Dec 1;28(23):3158–60.65. Cafasso M. noxdafox/clipspy [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Aug 8]. Available from:https://github.com/noxdafox/clipspy66. CLIPS: A Tool for Building Expert Systems [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 20]. Available from:http://www.clipsrules.net/67. Aronson AR. Effective mapping of biomedical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap program. ProcAMIA Symp. 2001;17–21.68. Aronson AR, Lang FM. An overview of MetaMap: historical perspective and recent advances. J Am MedInform Assoc [Internet]. 2010 May [cited 2017 Jul 21];17(3):229–36. Available from:https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-lookup/doi/10.1136/jamia.2009.00273369. Semantic Types and Groups - MetaMap documentation [Internet]. [cited 2022 Feb 21]. Available from:https://lhncbc.nlm.nih.gov/ii/tools/MetaMap/documentation/SemanticTypesAndGroups.html70. Sharp R, Pyarelal A, Gyori B, Alcock K, Laparra E, Valenzuela-Escárcega MA, et al. Eidos, INDRA, &Delphi: From Free Text to Executable Causal Models. Proc 2019 Conf North Am Chapter Assoc ComputLinguist Demonstr. 2019;6.71. clulab/eidos [Internet]. Computational Language Understanding Lab (CLU Lab) at University of Arizona; 2020[cited 2020 Aug 14]. Available from: https://github.com/clulab/eidos72. Bazrgar M, Khodabakhsh P, Mohagheghi F, Prudencio M, Ahmadiani A. Brain microRNAs dysregulation:Implication for missplicing and abnormal post-translational modifications of tau protein in Alzheimer’s disease58bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphand related tauopathies. Pharmacol Res. 2020;155:104729.73. Marcelli S, Corbo M, Iannuzzi F, Negri L, Blandini F, Nistico R, et al. The Involvement of Post-TranslationalModifications in Alzheimer’s Disease. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2018 22;15(4):313–35.74. Schaffert LN, Carter WG. Do Post-Translational Modifications Influence Protein Aggregation inNeurodegenerative Diseases: A Systematic Review. Brain Sci [Internet]. 2020 Apr 11 [cited 2020 Oct13];10(4). Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7226274/75. Rindflesch TC, Fiszman M. The interaction of domain knowledge and linguistic structure in natural languageprocessing: interpreting hypernymic propositions in biomedical text. J Biomed Inform [Internet]. 2003 Dec[cited 2020 May 28];36(6):462–77. Available from:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S153204640300117576. Relation Ontology [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 20]. Available from: https://obofoundry.org/ontology/ro.html77. Fine K. Towards a Theory of Part. J Philos [Internet]. 2010 Nov 1 [cited 2023 Feb 25];107(11):559–89.Available from:https://www.pdcnet.org/pdc/bvdb.nsf/purchase?openform&fp=jphil&id=jphil_2010_0107_0011_0559_058978. Kahn CE. Transitive closure of subsumption and causal relations in a large ontology of radiological diagnosis. JBiomed Inform [Internet]. 2016 Jun 1 [cited 2021 Nov 12];61:27–33. Available from:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S153204641630006579. oborel/obo-relations [Internet]. oborel; 2020 [cited 2020 Aug 8]. Available from:https://github.com/oborel/obo-relations80. Horrocks I, Patel-schneider PF. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning on the Semantic Web: OWL.81. OWL Web Ontology Language Reference [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 28]. Available from:https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/82. NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) [Internet]. [cited 2020 Aug 8]. Available from:https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/1991001473083. Beckers SV. The Transitivity and Asymmetry of Actual Causation. Open Access J Philos [Internet]. 2017;4.Available from: http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.12405314.0004.00184. Callahan T. PheKnowLator [Internet]. 2019. Available from: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.340143785. OWL - Semantic Web Standards [Internet]. [cited 2020 Aug 20]. Available from: https://www.w3.org/OWL/86. v2 Data Sources · callahantiff/PheKnowLator Wiki [Internet]. GitHub. [cited 2022 Jun 1]. Available from:https://github.com/callahantiff/PheKnowLator87. NetworkX — NetworkX documentation [Internet]. [cited 2020 Aug 21]. Available from:https://networkx.github.io/88. Callahan TJ, Baumgartner WA, Bada M, Stefanski AL, Tripodi I, White EK, et al. OWL-NETS: TransformingOWL Representations for Improved Network Inference. Pac Symp Biocomput Pac Symp Biocomput [Internet].2018 [cited 2021 Aug 9];23:133–44. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5737627/89. OpenLink Software: Virtuoso Homepage [Internet]. [cited 2022 Jun 7]. Available from:https://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/90. 13.5.2.2 Confounding and adjustment [Internet]. [cited 2023 Feb 15]. Available from:https://handbook-5-1.cochrane.org/chapter_13/13_5_2_2_confounding_and_adjustment.htm91. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, et al. Gene ontology: tool for theunification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet. 2000 May;25(1):25–9.92. Gene Ontology Resource [Internet]. Gene Ontology Resource. [cited 2022 Mar 20]. Available from:http://geneontology.org/93. Human Phenotype Ontology [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 20]. Available from: https://hpo.jax.org/app/94. SOD2 superoxide dismutase 2 [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene - NCBI [Internet]. [cited 2022 May 28].Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/664895. Flynn JM, Melov S. SOD2 in Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Neurodegeneration. Free Radic Biol Med[Internet]. 2013 Sep [cited 2022 May 27];62:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.05.027. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3811078/96. Wiener HW, Perry RT, Chen Z, Harrell LE, Go RCP. A polymorphism in SOD2 is associated with developmentof Alzheimer’s disease. Genes Brain Behav. 2007 Nov;6(8):770–5.97. Nguyen M, Sabry R, St. John . Elizabeth J, Favetta LA. Bisphenol A and S, but Not F, Alter Oxidative StressLevels in Spermatozoa. J Endocr Soc [Internet]. 2021 May 1 [cited 2022 Jun 5];5(Supplement_1):A483–4.Available from: https://doi.org/10.1210/jendso/bvab048.98959bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph98. Braun: Early-life exposure to EDCs: role in childhood... - Google Scholar [Internet]. [cited 2022 Jun 6].Available from:https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Early-life%20exposure%20to%20EDCs%3A%20role%20in%20childhood%20obesity%20and%20neurodevelopment&publication_year=2017&author=J.M.%20Braun99. Choi YJ, Lee YA, Hong YC, Cho J, Lee KS, Shin CH, et al. Effect of prenatal bisphenol A exposure on earlychildhood body mass index through epigenetic influence on the insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor (IGF2R)gene. Environ Int [Internet]. 2020 Oct 1 [cited 2022 Jun 6];143:105929. Available from:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160412020318845100.Bisphenol A: How the Most Relevant Exposure Sources Contribute to Total Consumer Exposure - VonGoetz - 2010 - Risk Analysis - Wiley Online Library [Internet]. [cited 2022 Jun 6]. Available from:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2009.01345.x?casa_token=g9CVKHGnY7EAAAAA%3ARU__TZPsV8Fmu_6Qz259EJKD5PsDX5fbWC7wUCDA3sCcCZ3WY9rPuD46POLpkGjM26Ed6ndOSs28RA101.MTHFR methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene - NCBI [Internet]. [cited2022 May 28]. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/4524102.Dwyer R, Skrobot OA, Dwyer J, Munafo M, Kehoe PG. Using Alzgene-like approaches to investigatesusceptibility genes for vascular cognitive impairment. J Alzheimers Dis JAD. 2013;34(1):145–54.103.Lemche E. Early Life Stress and Epigenetics in Late-onset Alzheimer’s Dementia: A Systematic Review.Curr Genomics [Internet]. 2018 Nov [cited 2021 Oct 2];19(7):522–602. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6194433/104.Varga EA, Sturm AC, Misita CP, Moll S. Homocysteine and MTHFR Mutations. Circulation [Internet].2005 May 17 [cited 2022 May 28];111(19):e289–93. Available from:https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.cir.0000165142.37711.e7105.Saczynski JS, Beiser A, Seshadri S, Auerbach S, Wolf PA, Au R. Depressive symptoms and risk ofdementia: the Framingham Heart Study. Neurology. 2010 Jul 6;75(1):35–41.106.Sgroi S, Capper-Loup C, Paganetti P, Kaelin-Lang A. Enkephalin and dynorphin neuropeptides aredifferently correlated with locomotor hypersensitivity and levodopa-induced dyskinesia in parkinsonian rats.Exp Neurol. 2016 Jun;280:80–8.107.PubChem. PDYN - prodynorphin (human) [Internet]. [cited 2022 May 29]. Available from:https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/PDYN/human108.Kwintkiewicz J, Nishi Y, Yanase T, Giudice LC. Peroxisome Proliferator–Activated Receptor-γ MediatesBisphenol A Inhibition of FSH-Stimulated IGF-1, Aromatase, and Estradiol in Human Granulosa Cells.Environ Health Perspect [Internet]. 2010 Mar [cited 2022 Feb 23];118(3):400–6. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2854770/109.Pascual-Lucas M, Viana da Silva S, Di Scala M, Garcia-Barroso C, González-Aseguinolaza G, Mulle C, etal. Insulin-like growth factor 2 reverses memory and synaptic deficits in APP transgenic mice. EMBO MolMed. 2014 Oct;6(10):1246–62.110.Mellott TJ, Pender SM, Burke RM, Langley EA, Blusztajn JK. IGF2 ameliorates amyloidosis, increasescholinergic marker expression and raises BMP9 and neurotrophin levels in the hippocampus of theAPPswePS1dE9 Alzheimer’s disease model mice. PloS One. 2014;9(4):e94287.111. Forré P, Mooij JM. Markov Properties for Graphical Models with Cycles and Latent Variables [Internet]. arXiv;2017 Oct [cited 2022 Jun 5]. Report No.: arXiv:1710.08775. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.08775112.Lauritzen SL, Richardson TS. Chain graph models and their causal interpretations. J R Stat Soc Ser B StatMethodol [Internet]. 2002 [cited 2021 Oct 2];64(3):321–48. Available from:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1467-9868.00340113.114.Mirza SS, Wolters FJ, Swanson SA, Koudstaal PJ, Hofman A, Tiemeier H, et al. 10-year trajectories ofdepressive symptoms and risk of dementia: a population-based study. Lancet Psychiatry. 2016 Jul;3(7):628–35.Jang YJ, Kang C, Myung W, Lim SW, Moon YK, Kim H, et al. Additive interaction of mid- to late-lifedepression and cerebrovascular disease on the risk of dementia: a nationwide population-based cohort study.Alzheimers Res Ther [Internet]. 2021 [cited 2022 Mar 13];13. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/pmc/articles/PMC7968260/115.Royall DR, Palmer RF. Alzheimer’s disease pathology does not mediate the association between depressivesymptoms and subsequent cognitive decline. Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc. 2013 May;9(3):318–25.116.Singh-Manoux A, Dugravot A, Fournier A, Abell J, Ebmeier K, Kivimäki M, et al. Trajectories of60bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphDepressive Symptoms Before Diagnosis of Dementia. JAMA Psychiatry [Internet]. 2017 Jul [cited 2022 Aug23];74(7):712–8. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5710246/117.Brommelhoff JA, Gatz M, Johansson B, McArdle JJ, Fratiglioni L, Pedersen NL. Depression as a riskfactor or prodromal feature for dementia? Findings in a population-based sample of Swedish twins. PsycholAging. 2009 Jun;24(2):373–84.118.Almeida OP, Hankey GJ, Yeap BB, Golledge J, Flicker L. Depression as a modifiable factor to decrease therisk of dementia. Transl Psychiatry [Internet]. 2017 May [cited 2022 Mar 13];7(5):e1117. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/pmc/articles/PMC5534958/119.Stang PE, Ryan PB, Overhage JM, Schuemie MJ, Hartzema AG, Welebob E. Variation in choice of studydesign: findings from the Epidemiology Design Decision Inventory and Evaluation (EDDIE) survey. Drug Saf.2013 Oct;36 Suppl 1:S15-25.120.Patel CJ, Burford B, Ioannidis JPA. Assessment of vibration of effects due to model specification candemonstrate the instability of observational associations. J Clin Epidemiol. 2015 Sep;68(9):1046–58.121.Das J, G K R. Post stroke depression: The sequelae of cerebral stroke. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2018Jul;90:104–14.122.Lewin-Richter A, Volz M, Jöbges M, Werheid K. Predictivity of Early Depressive Symptoms forPost-Stroke Depression. J Nutr Health Aging. 2015 Aug;19(7):754–8.123.Medeiros GC, Roy D, Kontos N, Beach SR. Post-stroke depression: A 2020 updated review. Gen HospPsychiatry. 2020 Oct;66:70–80.124.Lo Coco D, Lopez G, Corrao S. Cognitive impairment and stroke in elderly patients. Vasc Health RiskManag. 2016;12:105–16.125.Zhou J, Yu JT, Wang HF, Meng XF, Tan CC, Wang J, et al. Association between stroke and Alzheimer’sdisease: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Alzheimers Dis JAD. 2015;43(2):479–89.126.Vijayan M, Reddy PH. Stroke, Vascular Dementia, and Alzheimer’s Disease: Molecular Links. JAlzheimers Dis JAD. 2016 Sep 6;54(2):427–43.127.Rindflesch TC, Libbus B, Hristovski D, Aronson AR, Kilicoglu H. Semantic Relations Asserting theEtiology of Genetic Diseases. AMIA Annu Symp Proc [Internet]. 2003 [cited 2023 Feb 14];2003:554–8.Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1480275/128.Steptoe A, Wikman A, Molloy GJ, Kaski JC. Anaemia and the development of depressive symptomsfollowing acute coronary syndrome: longitudinal clinical observational study. BMJ Open. 2012;2(1):e000551.129.Moehner S, Becker K, Lange JA, von Stockum S, Heinemann K. Risk of depression and anemia in users ofhormonal endometriosis treatments: Results from the VIPOS study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2020Aug;251:212–7.130. Winchester LM, Powell J, Lovestone S, Nevado-Holgado AJ. Red blood cell indices and anaemia ascausative factors for cognitive function deficits and for Alzheimer’s disease. Genome Med. 2018 Jun28;10(1):51.131.AGT angiotensinogen [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene - NCBI [Internet]. [cited 2022 Jun 6]. Availablefrom: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene?Db=gene&Cmd=DetailsSearch&Term=183132.Ajmal A, Gessert CE, Johnson BP, Renier CM, Palcher JA. Effect of angiotensin converting enzymeinhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers on hemoglobin levels. BMC Res Notes [Internet]. 2013 Nov 4[cited 2022 Jun 9];6:443. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4228356/133.Faux NG, Rembach A, Wiley J, Ellis KA, Ames D, Fowler CJ, et al. An anemia of Alzheimer’s disease.Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Nov;19(11):1227–34.134.135.Hare DJ, Doecke JD, Faux NG, Rembach A, Volitakis I, Fowler CJ, et al. Decreased plasma iron inAlzheimer’s disease is due to transferrin desaturation. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2015 Mar 18;6(3):398–402.Mao Y, Liu X, Song Y, Zhai C, Zhang L. Data from: VEGF-A/VEGFR-2 and FGF-2/FGFR-1 but notPDGF-BB/PDGFR-β play important roles in promoting immature and inflammatory intraplaque angiogenesis[Internet]. Dryad; 2019 [cited 2022 Jun 9]. p. 266587 bytes. Available from:http://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.5061/dryad.8tt0411136.Harris R, Miners JS, Allen S, Love S. VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 in Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers DisJAD. 2018;61(2):741–52.137.Jeong SM, Shin DW, Lee JE, Hyeon JH, Lee J, Kim S. Anemia is associated with incidence of dementia: anational health screening study in Korea involving 37,900 persons. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2017 Dec 6;9(1):94.138.Shafi M, Taufiq F, Mehmood H, Afsar S, Badar A. Relation between Depressive Disorder and Iron61bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphDeficiency Anemia among Adults Reporting to a Secondary Healthcare Facility: A Hospital-Based CaseControl Study. J Coll Physicians Surg--Pak JCPSP. 2018 Jun;28(6):456–559.139.Hosseini SR, Zabihi A, Ebrahimi SH, Jafarian Amiri SR, Kheirkhah F, Bijani A. The Prevalence of Anemiaand its Association with Depressive Symptoms among Older Adults in North of Iran. J Res Health Sci[Internet]. 2018 Dec 3 [cited 2022 Jul 6];18(4):e00431. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6941631/Vulser H, Wiernik E, Hoertel N, Thomas F, Pannier B, Czernichow S, et al. Association betweendepression and anemia in otherwise healthy adults. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2016 Aug;134(2):150–60.Linard M, Bezin J, Hucteau E, Joly P, Garrigue I, Dartigues JF, et al. Antiherpetic drugs: a potential way toprevent Alzheimer’s disease? Alzheimers Res Ther [Internet]. 2022 Jan 7 [cited 2022 Jul 19];14(1):3. Availablefrom: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13195-021-00950-0140.141.142.Moir RD, Lathe R, Tanzi RE. The antimicrobial protection hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease. AlzheimersDement J Alzheimers Assoc. 2018 Dec;14(12):1602–14.143.Kumar DKV, Eimer WA, Tanzi RE, Moir RD. Alzheimer’s disease: the potential therapeutic role of thenatural antibiotic amyloid-β peptide. Neurodegener Dis Manag. 2016 Oct;6(5):345–8.144.Vijaya Kumar DK, Moir RD. The Emerging Role of Innate Immunity in Alzheimer’s Disease.Neuropsychopharmacol Off Publ Am Coll Neuropsychopharmacol. 2017 Jan;42(1):362.145.Eimer WA, Vijaya Kumar DK, Shanmugam NKN, Rodriguez AS, Mitchell T, Washicosky KJ, et al.Alzheimer’s Disease-Associated β-Amyloid Is Rapidly Seeded by Herpesviridae to Protect against BrainInfection. Neuron [Internet]. 2018 Jul 11 [cited 2022 Jul 19];99(1):56-63.e3. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6075814/146.Abbott A. Depression: the radical theory linking it to inflammation. Nature [Internet]. 2018 May 29 [cited2022 Feb 28];557(7707):633–4. Available from: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-05261-3147.148.Lee CH, Giuliani F. The Role of Inflammation in Depression and Fatigue. Front Immunol [Internet]. 2019Jul 19 [cited 2022 Feb 28];10:1696. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6658985/Kinney JW, Bemiller SM, Murtishaw AS, Leisgang AM, Salazar AM, Lamb BT. Inflammation as a centralmechanism in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement Transl Res Clin Interv [Internet]. 2018 Sep 6 [cited2022 Feb 28];4:575–90. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6214864/149.Hampel H, Caraci F, Cuello AC, Caruso G, Nisticò R, Corbo M, et al. A Path Toward Precision Medicinefor Neuroinflammatory Mechanisms in Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Immunol [Internet]. 2020 Mar 31 [cited2021 May 12];11. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7137904/150.Lyra e Silva NM, Gonçalves RA, Pascoal TA, Lima-Filho RAS, Resende E de PF, Vieira ELM, et al.Pro-inflammatory interleukin-6 signaling links cognitive impairments and peripheral metabolic alterations inAlzheimer’s disease. Transl Psychiatry [Internet]. 2021 Apr 28 [cited 2022 Feb 27];11(1):1–15. Available from:https://www.nature.com/articles/s41398-021-01349-z151.Tani Y, Fujiwara T, Kondo K. Association Between Adverse Childhood Experiences and Dementia in OlderJapanese Adults. JAMA Netw Open. 2020 Feb 5;3(2):e1920740.152.Ciccarese P, Wu E, Wong G, Ocana M, Kinoshita J, Ruttenberg A, et al. The SWAN biomedical discourseontology. J Biomed Inform. 2008 Oct;41(5):739–51.153.Rosemblat G, Fiszman M, Shin D, Kilicoglu H. Towards a characterization of apparent contradictions inthe biomedical literature using context analysis. J Biomed Inform. 2019;98:103275.154.Alamri A. The Detection of Contradictory Claims in Biomedical Abstracts [Internet] [phd]. University ofSheffield; 2016 [cited 2019 Aug 15]. Available from: http://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/15893/155.156.Nordon G, Gottlieb L, Radinsky K. Chemical and Textual Embeddings for Drug Repurposing. :6.Hsieh KL, Plascencia-Villa G, Lin KH, Perry G, Jiang X, Kim Y. Deep Learning for Alzheimer’s DiseaseDrug Repurposing using Knowledge Graph and Multi-level Evidence [Internet]. medRxiv; 2021 [cited 2022May 2]. p. 2021.12.03.21267235. Available from:https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.12.03.21267235v1157.Malec SA, Wei P, Xu H, Bernstam EV, Myneni S, Cohen T. Literature-Based Discovery of Confounding inObservational Clinical Data. AMIA Annu Symp Proc AMIA Symp. 2016;2016:1920–9.158.Swanson DR. Fish oil, Raynaud’s syndrome, and undiscovered public knowledge. Perspect Biol Med. 1986Autumn;30(1):7–18.159.Smalheiser NR. Rediscovering Don Swanson: the Past, Present and Future of Literature-Based Discovery. JData Inf Sci Wars Pol [Internet]. 2017 Dec;2(4):43–64. Available from:62bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphhttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5771422/160.Smalheiser NR, Swanson DR. Using ARROWSMITH: a computer-assisted approach to formulating andassessing scientific hypotheses. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 1998 Nov;57(3):149–53.161.Smalheiser NR. Literature-based discovery: Beyond the ABCs. J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol [Internet]. 2012Feb [cited 2017 Jul 21];63(2):218–24. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/asi.21599162.Ahlers CB, Hristovski D, Kilicoglu H, Rindflesch TC. Using the literature-based discovery paradigm toinvestigate drug mechanisms. AMIA Annu Symp Proc AMIA Symp. 2007 Oct 11;6–10.163.Cohen T, Widdows D, Schvaneveldt RW, Davies P, Rindflesch TC. Discovering discovery patterns withPredication-based Semantic Indexing. J Biomed Inform. 2012 Dec;45(6):1049–65.164.Cohen T, Widdows D, Schvaneveldt R, Rindflesch TC. Finding Schizophrenia’s Prozac EmergentRelational Similarity in Predication Space. In: Song D, Melucci M, Frommholz I, Zhang P, Wang L, Arafat S,editors. Quantum Interaction. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2011. p. 48–59.165.Hristovski D, Kastrin A, Dinevski D, Rindflesch TC. Constructing a Graph Database for SemanticLiterature-Based Discovery. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2015;216:1094.166.167.168.Malec SA, Bernstam EV, Wei P, Boyce RD, Cohen T. Using computable knowledge mined from theliterature to elucidate confounders for EHR-based pharmacovigilance. medRxiv [Internet]. 2020; Availablefrom: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/07/10/2020.07.08.20113035.1Cohen T, Widdows D. Embedding of semantic predications. J Biomed Inform. 2017 Apr;68:150–66.Cohen T, Schvaneveldt RW, Rindflesch TC. Predication-based Semantic Indexing: Permutations as aMeans to Encode Predications in Semantic Space. AMIA Annu Symp Proc [Internet]. 2009;2009:114–8.Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2815384/169.Elsworth B, Dawe K, Vincent EE, Langdon R, Lynch BM, Martin RM, et al. MELODI: Mining EnrichedLiterature Objects to Derive Intermediates. Int J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2018 Apr 1 [cited 2020 Aug14];47(2):369–79. Available from: https://academic.oup.com/ije/article/47/2/369/4803214170.Cohen T, Whitfield GK, Schvaneveldt RW, Mukund K, Rindflesch T. EpiphaNet: An Interactive Tool toSupport Biomedical Discoveries. J Biomed Discov Collab [Internet]. 2010;5:21–49. Available from:http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2990276/171.the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Shen X, Ma S, Vemuri P, Simon G. Challenges andOpportunities with Causal Discovery Algorithms: Application to Alzheimer’s Pathophysiology. Sci Rep[Internet]. 2020 Dec [cited 2020 Jun 1];10(1):2975. Available from:http://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-59669-x172.Ahlers CB, Fiszman M, Demner-Fushman D, Lang FM, Rindflesch TC. Extracting semantic predicationsfrom Medline citations for pharmacogenomics. Pac Symp Biocomput Pac Symp Biocomput. 2007;209–20.“MetaMap Team.” MetaMap - A Tool For Recognizing UMLS Concepts in Text [Internet]. 2015 [cited173.2015 Jun 4]. Available from: http://metamap.nlm.nih.gov/174.Harris ZS. A theory of language and information: a mathematical approach [Internet]. Clarendon Press;1991. Available from: https://books.google.com/books?id=eT5iAAAAMAAJ175.Friedman C, Kra P, Rzhetsky A. Two biomedical sublanguages: a description based on the theories ofZellig Harris. J Biomed Inform [Internet]. 2002 Aug 1 [cited 2023 Feb 15];35(4):222–35. Available from:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532046403000121176.Bernhardt PJ, Humphrey SM, Rindflesch TC. Determining Prominent Subdomains in Medicine. AMIAAnnu Symp Proc [Internet]. 2005 [cited 2023 Feb 16];2005:46–50. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1560510/177.Di Martino M, Fusco D, Colais P, Pinnarelli L, Davoli M, Perucci CA. Differential misclassification ofconfounders in comparative evaluation of hospital care quality: caesarean sections in Italy. BMC Public Health[Internet]. 2014 Oct 8 [cited 2023 Feb 14];14:1049. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4210510/178.Liu W, Brookhart MA, Schneeweiss S, Mi X, Setoguchi S. Implications of M bias in epidemiologic studies:a simulation study. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Nov 15;176(10):938–48.179.VanderWeele TJ. On the relative nature of overadjustment and unnecessary adjustment. Epidemiol CambMass. 2009 Jul;20(4):496–9.180.Naimi AI, Cole SR, Kennedy EH. An introduction to g methods. Int J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2017 Apr 1[cited 2020 Jun 6];46(2):756–62. Available from: https://academic.oup.com/ije/article/46/2/756/2760169181.Robins J. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained exposure63bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphperiod—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Math Model [Internet]. 1986 Jan1;7(9):1393–512. Available from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0270025586900886Chesnaye NC, Stel VS, Tripepi G, Dekker FW, Fu EL, Zoccali C, et al. An introduction to inverse182.probability of treatment weighting in observational research. Clin Kidney J. 2022 Jan;15(1):14–20.183.Austin PC, Stuart EA. Moving towards best practice when using inverse probability of treatment weighting(IPTW) using the propensity score to estimate causal treatment effects in observational studies. Stat Med[Internet]. 2015 Dec 10;34(28):3661–79. Available from:http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4626409/184.Cole SR, Hernán MA. Constructing Inverse Probability Weights for Marginal Structural Models. Am JEpidemiol [Internet]. 2008 Sep 15 [cited 2021 Jul 31];168(6):656–64. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2732954/185.Tchetgen Tchetgen EJ, Glymour MM, Weuve J, Robins J. Specifying the correlation structure ininverse-probability- weighting estimation for repeated measures. Epidemiol Camb Mass. 2012 Jul;23(4):644–6.186.Adams R, Ji Y, Wang X, Saria S. Learning Models from Data with Measurement Error: TacklingUnderreporting. In: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning [Internet]. PMLR;2019 [cited 2023 Feb 9]. p. 61–70. Available from: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/adams19a.html187.Lin HW, Chen YH. Adjustment for missing confounders in studies based on observational databases: Am JEpidemiol. 2014 Aug 1;180(3):308–17.188.Munafò MR, Tilling K, Taylor AE, Evans DM, Davey Smith G. Collider scope: when selection bias cansubstantially influence observed associations. Int J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2018 Feb [cited 2022 Mar10];47(1):226–35. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5837306/189. Weuve J, Tchetgen Tchetgen EJ, Glymour MM, Beck TL, Aggarwal NT, Wilson RS, et al. Accounting forbias due to selective attrition: the example of smoking and cognitive decline. Epidemiol Camb Mass. 2012Jan;23(1):119–28.190.de Beurs E, Warmerdam L, Twisk J. Bias through selective inclusion and attrition: Representativenesswhen comparing provider performance with routine outcome monitoring data. Clin Psychol Psychother. 2019Jul;26(4):430–9.191.Hernán MA. Invited Commentary: Selection Bias Without Colliders. Am J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2017 Jun1 [cited 2023 Feb 9];185(11):1048–50. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6664806/192.Schwartz S, Gatto NM, Campbell UB. Transportability and causal generalization. Epidemiol Camb Mass.2011 Sep;22(5):745–6.193.Bareinboim E, Pearl J. Causal inference and the data-fusion problem. Proc Natl Acad Sci [Internet]. 2016Jul 5 [cited 2020 Oct 12];113(27):7345–52. Available from: https://www.pnas.org/content/113/27/7345194.Hripcsak G, Levine ME, Shang N, Ryan PB. Effect of vocabulary mapping for conditions on phenotypecohorts. J Am Med Inform Assoc JAMIA [Internet]. 2018 Nov 3 [cited 2020 Feb 20];25(12):1618–25.Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6289550/195.Lesko CR, Ackerman B, Webster-Clark M, Edwards JK. Target validity: Bringing treatment of externalvalidity in line with internal validity. Curr Epidemiol Rep. 2020 Sep;7(3):117–24.196.Eng CW, Glymour MM, Gilsanz P, Mungas DM, Mayeda ER, Meyer OL, et al. Do the Benefits ofEducational Attainment for Late-life Cognition Differ by Racial/Ethnic Group?: Evidence for HeterogenousTreatment Effects in the Kaiser Healthy Aging and Diverse Life Experience (KHANDLE) Study. AlzheimerDis Assoc Disord. 2021 Jun 1;35(2):106–13.197.Vable AM, Nguyen TT, Rehkopf D, Glymour MM, Hamad R. Differential associations between state-leveleducational quality and cardiovascular health by race: Early-life exposures and late-life health. SSM - PopulHealth. 2019 Aug;8:100418.198.Sterne JA, Hernán MA, McAleenan A, Reeves BC, Higgins JP. Assessing risk of bias in a non-randomizedstudy. In: Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [Internet]. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd;2019 [cited 2023 Feb 15]. p. 621–41. Available from:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781119536604.ch25199.Petersen JM, Barrett M, Ahrens KA, Murray EJ, Bryant AS, Hogue CJ, et al. The confounder matrix: Atool to assess confounding bias in systematic reviews of observational studies of etiology. Res Synth Methods.2022 Mar;13(2):242–54.200.Greenland S. Methods for epidemiologic analyses of multiple exposures: A review and comparative study64bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graph201.202.of maximum-likelihood, preliminary-testing, and empirical-bayes regression. Stat Med [Internet]. 1993 [cited2023 Feb 14];12(8):717–36. Available from: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sim.4780120802Murata S, Ono R, Yasuda H, Tanemura R, Kido Y, Kowa H. Effect of a Combined Exercise and CognitiveActivity Intervention on Cognitive Function in Community-dwelling Older Adults: A Pilot RandomizedControlled Trial. Phys Ther Res. 2021;24(2):112–9.Tager IB, Haight T, Sternfeld B, Yu Z, van Der Laan M. Effects of Physical Activity and BodyComposition on Functional Limitation in the Elderly: Application of the Marginal Structural Model.Epidemiology [Internet]. 2004 Jul [cited 2023 Feb 14];15(4):479. Available from:https://journals.lww.com/epidem/Fulltext/2004/07000/Effects_of_Physical_Activity_and_Body_Composition.16.aspx203.Kessing LV, Andersen PK. Does the risk of developing dementia increase with the number of episodes inpatients with depressive disorder and in patients with bipolar disorder? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004Dec;75(12):1662–6.204.Kessing LV, Forman JL, Andersen PK. Does lithium protect against dementia? Bipolar Disord. 2010Feb;12(1):87–94.205.Robins JM, Hernán MÁ, Brumback B. Marginal Structural Models and Causal Inference in Epidemiology.Epidemiology [Internet]. 2000 Sep [cited 2022 Mar 13];11(5):550–60. Available from:https://journals.lww.com/epidem/fulltext/2000/09000/marginal_structural_models_and_causal_inference_in.11.aspx206.Shinozaki T, Suzuki E. Understanding Marginal Structural Models for Time-Varying Exposures: Pitfallsand Tips. J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2020 Sep 5 [cited 2023 Feb 15];30(9):377–89. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7429147/207.Bhalla RK, Butters MA, Becker JT, Houck PR, Snitz BE, Lopez OL, et al. Patterns of mild cognitiveimpairment after treatment of depression in the elderly. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry Off J Am Assoc GeriatrPsychiatry. 2009 Apr;17(4):308–16.208.Butters MA, Whyte EM, Nebes RD, Begley AE, Dew MA, Mulsant BH, et al. The nature and determinantsof neuropsychological functioning in late-life depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004 Jun;61(6):587–95.209.Ganguli M. Depression, cognitive impairment and dementia: Why should clinicians care about the web ofcausation? Indian J Psychiatry [Internet]. 2009 Jan [cited 2020 Mar 1];51(Suppl1):S29–34. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3038544/210.Butters MA, Sweet RA, Mulsant BH, Ilyas Kamboh M, Pollock BG, Begley AE, et al. APOE is associatedwith age-of-onset, but not cognitive functioning, in late-life depression. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry.2003;18(12):1075–81.211.Safieh M, Korczyn AD, Michaelson DM. ApoE4: an emerging therapeutic target for Alzheimer’s disease.BMC Med [Internet]. 2019 Mar 20;17(1):64. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-019-1299-4212.Qiu WQ, Zhu H, Dean M, Liu Z, Vu L, Fan G, et al. Amyloid-associated depression and ApoE4 allele:longitudinal follow-up for the development of Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry [Internet]. 2016Mar [cited 2021 Sep 30];31(3):316–22. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4840849/213.Hernán MA, Brumback BA, Robins JM. Estimating the causal effect of zidovudine on CD4 count with amarginal structural model for repeated measures. Stat Med. 2002 Jun 30;21(12):1689–709.214.Chesnaye NC, Stel VS, Tripepi G, Dekker FW, Fu EL, Zoccali C, et al. An introduction to inverseprobability of treatment weighting in observational research. Clin Kidney J. 2022 Jan;15(1):14–20.215.Robins JM, Rotnitzky A, Zhao LP. Estimation of Regression Coefficients When Some Regressors are notAlways Observed. J Am Stat Assoc [Internet]. 1994 Sep 1 [cited 2020 Nov 4];89(427):846–66. Available from:https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1994.10476818216.Barnes DE, Yaffe K. The projected effect of risk factor reduction on Alzheimer’s disease prevalence.Lancet Neurol. 2011 Sep;10(9):819–28.217.Ding P, Miratrix L. To Adjust or Not to Adjust? Sensitivity Analysis of M-Bias and Butterfly-Bias.ArXiv14080324 Math Stat [Internet]. 2014 Aug 1 [cited 2019 Oct 19]; Available from:http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.0324218.Flanders WD, Ye D. Limits for the Magnitude of M-bias and Certain Other Types of Structural SelectionBias. Epidemiol Camb Mass. 2019 Jul;30(4):501–8.219.Greenland S. Quantifying biases in causal models: classical confounding vs collider-stratification bias.65bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.18.500549; this version posted March 6, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. Malec et al. (2022) Causal feature selection using a knowledge graphEpidemiol Camb Mass. 2003 May;14(3):300–6.220.Groenwold RHH, Palmer TM, Tilling K. To Adjust or Not to Adjust? When a “Confounder” Is OnlyMeasured After Exposure. Epidemiol Camb Mass [Internet]. 2021 Mar [cited 2021 Oct 11];32(2):194–201.Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7850592/221.Kennedy EH, Balakrishnan S. Discussion of “Data-driven confounder selection via Markov and Bayesiannetworks” by Jenny Häggström. Biometrics [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2022 Aug 1];74(2):399–402. Availablefrom: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/biom.12787222.Ioannidis JPA, Tan YJ, Blum MR. Limitations and Misinterpretations of E-Values for Sensitivity Analysesof Observational Studies. Ann Intern Med [Internet]. 2019 Jan 1 [cited 2021 Apr 18];170(2):108–11. Availablefrom: http://www.acpjournals.org/doi/10.7326/M18-2159223.Tennant PWG, Murray EJ, Arnold KF, Berrie L, Fox MP, Gadd SC, et al. Use of directed acyclic graphs(DAGs) to identify confounders in applied health research: review and recommendations. Int J Epidemiol[Internet]. 2021 Apr 1 [cited 2021 May 30];50(2):620–32. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyaa213Textor J, Zander B van der, Ankan A. dagitty: Graphical Analysis of Structural Causal Models [Internet].224.2021 [cited 2021 Aug 3]. Available from: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=dagitty225. Wise J, de Barron AG, Splendiani A, Balali-Mood B, Vasant D, Little E, et al. Implementation andrelevance of FAIR data principles in biopharmaceutical R&D. Drug Discov Today [Internet]. 2019 Apr 1 [cited2021 Jan 10];24(4):933–8. Available from:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359644618303039226.Fang Y, He W, Hu X, Wang H. A method for sample size calculation via E-value in the planning ofobservational studies. Pharm Stat [Internet]. [cited 2020 Sep 13];n/a(n/a). Available from:http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pst.2064227.Localio AR, Stack CB, Griswold ME. Sensitivity Analysis for Unmeasured Confounding: E-Values forObservational Studies. Ann Intern Med. 2017 Aug 15;167(4):285–6.228.von Elm E, Altman DG, Egger M, Pocock SJ, Gøtzsche PC, Vandenbroucke JP, et al. The Strengthening theReporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement: guidelines for reportingobservational studies. Lancet Lond Engl. 2007 Oct 20;370(9596):1453–7.229.Cornfield J. A Statistical Problem Arising from Retrospective Studies. Proc Third Berkeley Symp MathStat Probab Vol 4 Contrib Biol Probl Health [Internet]. 1956 Jan 1 [cited 2021 May 1];135–48. Available from:https://www.projecteuclid.org/ebooks/berkeley-symposium-on-mathematical-statistics-and-probability/Proceedings-of-the-Third-Berkeley-Symposium-on-Mathematical-Statistics-and/chapter/A-Statistical-Problem-Arising-from-Retrospective-Studies/bsmsp/1200502552230.Vandenbroucke JP. Commentary: ‘Smoking and lung cancer’—the embryogenesis of modernepidemiology. Int J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2009 Oct 1 [cited 2021 May 10];38(5):1193–6. Available from:https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyp292231.VanderWeele TJ. Are Greenland, Ioannidis and Poole opposed to the Cornfield conditions? A defence ofthe E-value. Int J Epidemiol [Internet]. 2021 Oct 13 [cited 2022 Jul 10];51(2):364–71. Available from:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9082787/232.Forrest CB, McTigue KM, Hernandez AF, Cohen LW, Cruz H, Haynes K, et al. PCORnet® 2020: currentstate, accomplishments, and future directions. J Clin Epidemiol. 2021 Jan;129:60–7.233.Fleurence RL, Curtis LH, Califf RM, Platt R, Selby JV, Brown JS. Launching PCORnet, a nationalpatient-centered clinical research network. J Am Med Inform Assoc [Internet]. 2014 Jul 1 [cited 2017 Jul2];21(4):578–82. Available from:https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article/21/4/578/2909226/Launching-PCORnet-a-national-patient-centered234.All of Us Research Program Investigators, Denny JC, Rutter JL, Goldstein DB, Philippakis A, Smoller JW,et al. The “All of Us” Research Program. N Engl J Med. 2019 Aug 15;381(7):668–76.66