ReligionISSN: 0048-721X (Print) 1096-1151 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rrel20Daniel Dubuisson, The Western Construction ofReligionSteven Engler & Dean MillerTo cite this article: Steven Engler & Dean Miller (2006) Daniel Dubuisson, The WesternConstruction of Religion , Religion, 36:3, 119-178, DOI: 10.1016/j.religion.2006.08.001To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.religion.2006.08.001Published online: 19 Oct 2011.Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2069View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found athttps://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rrel20Religion 36 (2006) 119e178www.elsevier.com/locate/religionReview symposiumDaniel Dubuisson, The WesternConstruction of ReligionSteven Engler a,*, Dean Miller ba Department of Humanities, Mount Royal College, Calgary, Alberta T3N 6K6, Canadab Emeritus, Department of History, University of Rochester,10848 South Hoyne Avenue, Chicago, IL 60643, USAAbstractIn The Western Construction of Religion Daniel Dubuisson argues that the concept of ‘religion’ is toohistorically and culturally contingent to serve as the basis for a comparative discipline. The concept isindigenous to Western culture and is inherently theological and phenomenological. He argues for a con-structionist view of the discipline and proposes the concept ‘cosmographic formations’ as a replacementfor ‘religion’. Religious phenomena should be taken as discursive constructions that link embodied individ-uals to the social, cultural and cosmic orders. The following reviews evaluate Dubuisson’s arguments,relating them to broader currents in the theory of religion. Daniel Dubuisson responds to each of thereviews.1(cid:2) 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.* Corresponding author.E-mail address: sjengler@gmail.com (S. Engler).1 The reviews by Engler, Hughes and Segal were presented in a session of the Critical Theory and Discourses onReligion Group of the American Academy of Religion meeting in San Antonio, Texas, in November 2005. Ann Taves’contribution is adapted from her response to these commentators at that AAR Session. An additional review fromthat session, by Gustavo Benavides, is not included here because portions were previously committed for publicationelsewhere. Dean Miller gathered the three additional reviews. Dubuisson’s responses were edited and translated bySteven Engler.0048-721X/$ - see front matter (cid:2) 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.religion.2006.08.001120S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178Agency, order and time in the human science of religionSteven EnglerDepartment of Humanities, Mount Royal College, Calgary, Alberta T3N 6K6, CanadaE-mail address: sjengler@gmail.comIn The Western Construction of Religion (2003) Daniel Dubuisson criticises religious studies onthe grounds that its axiomatic category, ‘religion’, is too historically and culturally contingent toserve as the basis for a comparative discipline. He argues that ‘the West invented religion’ (a leg-acy of Christian concepts and nineteenth-century colonial scholarship) (p. 12).2 He faults scholarsof religion for propagating this deception: ‘the history of religions should not have exported thissingular notion, found nowhere else, and issuing from a history that took its own unique course,without having subjected it beforehand to a rigorous critical examination’ (p. 191).In two respects Dubuisson goes beyond similar arguments by others, such as Talad Asad, Rus-sell McCutcheon and Timothy Fitzgerald. First, he argues that ‘religion’ is not just another con-struct. Rather, the concept has filled an ‘architectonic function’it has‘supplied the nucleus about which the West has constructed its own universe of values and repre-sentations’ (pp. 117, 39). Second, he proposes as a replacement the concept ‘cosmographic forma-tions’, which he roots in a universal instinct for creating conceptions that relate cosmic, culturaland social orders.in Western culture:The value of Dubuisson’s book lies not just in its critique of religion but also in the threads thathe draws upon in beginning to suggest a way to move our discussions forward. I will argue fourrelated claims. (1) Dubuisson’s discursive link between the themes of religion and order is veryuseful. (2) An ambiguous appeal to science presents a misleading dichotomy, leaving us to choosebetween naively essentialist and radically constructionist views of the study of religion, withDubuisson throwing his weight behind radical constructionism. (3) The claim that ‘cosmographicformations’ offer a truly universal category for cross-cultural comparison needs further clarifica-tion. (4) A clearer conception of agency can reframe and supplement the argument, reclaiming thepractical dimension of religion.The key question is, What is to be gained by replacing the concept of ‘religion’? For Dubuisson,religion is too limited a construct. If ‘religion’ is a construct, then a substitution is possible. If ‘re-ligion’ is a limited concept, then a substitution is desirable.The concept of religion, according to Dubuisson, is limited in three related ways. First, it drawson metaphysical presuppositions. Dubuisson suggests an alternative, because using ‘religion’ as ananalytical tool imports insider concepts, resulting in circularity: ‘A regrettable confusion con-stantly arises between religious ideas and ideas about religion’ (p. 55). ‘How could it leave thismagic circle when the object that it is supposed to study is supplied by its own cultural traditionwhich also surreptitiously imposes on it the means and frameworks for its inquiry?’ (p. 192).Second, ‘religion’ is culturally specific: ‘Religion, that is, the word, the idea, and above all theparticular domain that they all designate represents an entirely original creation that the Westalone conceived and developed after having converted to Christianity’ (p. 190). The ‘history of2 All unattributed page references in all reviews are to Dubuisson, 2003.S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178121religion thus reveals itself to be not only a Western discipline but a science born of the closingdecades of the nineteenth century’ (p. 155).Third, and most significant as a motivation for replacing it, the concept of religion hasplayed a foundational role in generating the ‘major paradigm’ of the West that has constrainednot just the history of religions but Western thought in general: religion plays a ‘decisive rolein the constitution of Western culture.. [R]eligion is at the heart of our ‘world’’ (p. 190).Religion is ‘the most ideological of Western creations’ (p. 147). This increases the risk of ac-cepting the concept uncritically: ‘religion’ is so foundational to the biases of Western intellectualperspectives that we can only leave behind its distorting influence by abandoning the conceptentirely.Dubuisson’s constructionism asserts that Western culture, in the wake of Christianity, is con-strained by an underlying conceptual framework:Western thought . (is) disposed of only a small number of theses and models.. a huge sys-tem of fractal shapes . dominated by the incessant activity of polemic and controversy. .This immemorial movement, inscribed in our oldest intellectual tradition, . offer(s) ourfields of knowledge the system of references and coordinates in which they inscribe them-selves. Every new idea or hypothesis immediately generates its antithesis, whose positionis a priori predictable.. We are advancing in a familiar, well-mapped universe, in whichthe same ideas never cease to be revived and recombined with one another. (pp. 132e3)The study of religion works itself out within this ‘tacit contract that a priori binds every Westernthinker to the vast complex formed by its interpretive grids’ (p. 144).Dubuisson turns to the relation between religion and science. There is a misleading ambiguityhere. Usually, he uses ‘science’ to refer to the social, or ‘human’, sciences, but occasionally he usesthe term to refer to the natural sciences. Dubuisson clearly holds that the two are different: ‘Un-like the natural sciences, the various human sciences never have to deal with raw data’ (p. 175).However, this distinction and its implications are not evoked consistently. Talk of ‘raw data’offers a misleadingly positivistic view of the natural sciences. It is all too easy to hold that thehuman sciences cannot live up to this ideal, but the portrayal is distorted, lending support bydefault to a constructionist view of the human sciences: ‘Contrary to the received opinion implicitin common parlance and embodied in a kind of scientific positivism, people do not live the THEworld, . since each human group lives only in its world (p. 204).Dubuisson distinguishes two levels at which the concepts ‘science’ and ‘religion’ work. At onelevel we find ‘the canonical opposition, religion versus science’, but ‘on another more global level,religious explanation and scientific explanation offer . undeniable affinities and amusing similar-ities’ (p. 150). Dubuisson means the human sciences here, and the affinity is constructionism. ForDubuisson, the human sciences are like religion, because both are constructs: scientific knowledgereflects the perspective of a specific culture; it is not universal and objective (see p. 203). And itmanifests inevitable progress (see p. 161).Dubuisson offers us a stark choice in conceptions of science: radical constructionism or simplis-tic realism. But this is made possible because in these passages he is referring to ‘the human sci-ences’. This excessively stark view of the natural sciences is easily discounted as a model for thesocial or human sciences (see Engler, 2004). He thus neglects the possibility of a trans-culturalmiddle ground, neither naively objective nor purely Western. I take Dubuisson’s term ‘human122S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178sciences’ as equivalent to ‘humanities and social sciences’, but here again, a constructionist viewseems to be evoked by default, in opposition to an overly positivistic account of the naturalsciences. A middle ground between ‘natural science-like’ social sciences and softer humanitiesseems ruled out of bounds by fiat.The concept of cosmographic formations is intended to broaden our attention from theoverly limited construct ‘religion’ to the generalintellectual paradigms of our culture, the‘cosmographic models [which] are few in number, and at bottom are summarised in a few simpleprototypes’ (p. 137). These two levels of conceptdreligion and cosmographic formationsdcorrespond to what Dubuisson calls ‘two distinct universes’: the concept of religion is an artifactwithin ‘the historical universe’; cosmographic formations participate in a higher universe, ‘thehypertext that ideally gathers in all the texts of our culture’ (p. 138; see also p. 210). By movingfrom the former level to the latter, Dubuisson hopes to allow the discipline to remove its concep-tual blinders and shift its focus to the most general of all possible cross-cultural frame-worksd‘the human conditions such as it is’ (p. 199). He seeks to move past the Westernessentialist concept that human nature is universal and inherently religious (see pp. 184e5) toa cross-cultural relational focus on the processes by which humans create the worlds in whichthey live. This is why he wishes to replace ‘religion’ with ‘cosmographic formation’. ‘Religion’is Western, whereas ‘cosmographic formation’ is more effective for comparative studies. ‘Reli-gion’ implies that all religions somehow converge on a common object or refract a common ref-erent, whereas ‘cosmographic formation’ finds commonality in the process of construction, not inthe object constructed.Dubuisson offers an interesting variety of constructionism: relativist over the phenomena con-structed but universalist over the raw materials and the process of construction. Constructionistviews do not necessarily commit us to a radical relativism if we focus on cross-cultural parallelson the raw materials. As Gustavo Benavides notes, talk of constructs leads us not to a sterilerelativism but to ‘the problem of the relationship between constructs and raw materials..[A]lthough one can manufacture all sorts of things using all kinds of raw materials, certainraw materials lend themselves to fashioning certain objects whereas other raw materials donot’ (Benavides, 2000, p. 116; see also Benavides, 1997a, p. 130; Benavides, 2001, p. 107; Engler,2004).For Dubuisson, cosmographic formations link ‘simple factual existence’ to specific culturalcontexts, embodying a ‘teleology’ oriented to a ‘principle of order’ (p. 18). They offer storiesthat link cosmic, cultural and social order. They offer a set of ‘images, symbols, and myths con-cerning humankind, the world, and society. so intrinsically tied to the existence of the group it-self that it finally appears . as its exclusive reference’ (p. 69). The ‘cosmographic operation’ thatproduces these formations has ‘the capacity to modify the nature of immediate experience, simplyby replacing it at the heart of an ordered, all-encompassing world’ (p. 49).Yet there are difficulties with an attempt to ground comparison in a universality over the rawmaterials of ‘simple factual existence’. Dubuisson recognises that we cannot escape the always al-ready present web of language. Nevertheless, to ground his cross-cultural comparison of ‘cosmo-graphic constructions’, he points to lived and embodied experience, which underlies all thedifferent worlds of human cultures (see p. 209). It is ‘by putting ourselves in this existential posi-tion (what people do in this world, how they have constructed it, and what they expect of it) thatthe study of cosmographic formations ought to be addressed’ (p. 203).S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178123The body is the primary raw material, and textualisation is the primary process of construction:A cosmographic formation . forms a functional and nearly harmonious whole with thetexts that utter and incarnate it.. All cultures have composed texts in which we find elab-orate descriptions and genuine theories of the body in actuality, theories charged with coor-dinating, interpreting, explaining the phenomena of death, suffering, sensation, memory, anddreaming. Here, given that we are dealing with the most perishable and fragile portion of ourbeing, textualization is indispensable.. The translation of the body into texts allows it tobecome an element of cosmographic formation. (pp. 210e11)What does it mean to translate the body into texts? Dubuisson would no doubt agree that thetranslation means the transcription of culturally specific ideas about lived experience, which arealways already a part of language. Translation cannot be a matter of bringing across into textssome universal human experience from outside of language. But given the necessary situatednessof embodied experience, how we compare one ‘translation of the body into texts’ with anotherin any rigorous manner. How do we evaluate comparisons made between ‘translations’ of an ir-retrievable original? What ‘body in actuality’, prior to texts, is accessible as that which is to betranslated? It seems that we can do no more than simply assert similarity or differencedbeyondany possibility of verifying or falsifying claims about the accuracy of such translationsdbecause‘individual life is already necessarily a cosmographic creation’ and ‘the ‘real world’ is never morethan an abstraction’ (pp. 207, 203).It is, of course, possible to compare beliefs or practices concerning the body. But the selectionof what we compare always presupposes a certain perspective. This perspective must always beinterrogated for historical and cultural biases, whether we apply the term ‘religion’ or proposean alternative concept to perform its task.There is a problem here of translation (see Engler et al., 2004). What guarantees that we pre-serve meaning when we translate descriptions of cross-cultural phenomena into talk of cosmo-graphic formations? This problem is not the same as that of preserving meaning whentranslating between the texts of different cultures, for cosmographic formations allegedly holdequally across all such boundaries. Can we really claim to translate specific cultural discoursesinto such a universal meta-discourse? Certainly ‘religion’ is a term with a long history andmany biases. But can Dubuisson attempt to avoid any hint of insider discourses really establisha truly outside perspective from which persons of all cultures can compare all culturalphenomena?There are difficulties in translating the one into the manydfor example, the body into texts.Talk of ‘the sacred’ faces a variant of this dilemma. The field of religious studies is haunted bythe claim that all religions are comparable because all are rooted in the same core of experienceor perception. That is, all religions are ‘religions’ because they all reflect or refract the sameessential reality of the sacred.3 This claim is rooted in a na€ıve appropriation of the phenomeno-logical tradition in continental philosophy. We face a problem if we hold the sacred to be somenon-rational, non-propositional ‘given’ that is brought across into the rational, prepositional3 This claim is not presupposed by cognitive theories of religion (see, for example, Pyysia¨ inen and Anttonen, 2002),prototype theories of religion (see, for example, Saler, 2000), or relational theories of religion (see, for example, Bena-vides, 1997b).124S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178languages of religions: ‘If the content of the given is non-propositional, then translation or inter-pretation becomes impossible’ (Penner, 2002, p. 168). It is untenable to respond that religiouslanguage refers in some non-literal manner, through metaphor or symbol. Labeling this response‘the theology of symbolic forms’, Nancy Frankenberry argues thateither a translation can be made of symbolic language, or it cannot. If it is translatable, thenit is possible to say what it ‘literally means’ for it has a syntax and a semantics.. On theother hand, if it is not translatable, because the symbolic meaning is supposed to exceedthe literal meaning as something ineffable, then Symbolic Formists are obligated to explainwhat the ‘extra meaning’ is, and how they are in a position to know it is different from anytranslation or paraphrase. (Frankenberry, 2002, p. 187)In the first case religious language has lost its mystery. In the second case it has lost its purchaseon meaning. Translating between cultures moves from one discrete language into another. Thecase is different when allegedly translating from the pre-linguistic body or the sacred (wholly otherand ineffable) into the many languages of specific cultural traditions.There are also difficulties with translating the many into the onedthat is, translating disparatecultural phenomena into cosmographic formations. Dubuisson is appropriately critical abouttranslation between the levels of data and theory:Although it is fortunate that cultures mutually translate themselves and try in this fashion tounderstand each other somewhat better, we should not conclude that what we translate intoour European languages, and because we translate it without any too great difficulty, refersback to universals to which we have the key. All scientific study today ought to have as itssine qua non the critical, uncompromising study of its own language. (p. 197)Dubuisson’s optimism about translation across cultures may be justified to some extent, but thepossibility of a universal cross-cultural frame for comparison works at a different logical level.Dubuisson faces a dilemma here: either the embodied foundation of his comparative frameworkis outside language, in which case talk of translating it makes little sense, or it is inside language,in which case it is trapped within distinct perspectives. Either way, the goal of universal compar-ison is undermined. Pointing to relations between bodies and texts cannot provide a firm founda-tion for a universal comparative framework: bodies and worldsdbeyond the relativisedperspectives of different culturesdcannot be accessed in a manner (rational, linguistic, literal,univocal, semantically robust) that would allow for verifiable comparison. The raw materials ofcosmographic constructions cannot provide a universal basis for comparison, though Dubuissonpoints to a very useful approach for the more limited comparative work of Western scholars,including scholars of religion.With greater success, Dubuisson points to the process of construction itself as the ground forcross-cultural comparison. He claims universality and above all heuristic value for the concept ofcosmographic formations. The heuristic approach is appropriate, but the basis for universalityseems to overemphasise the role of discourse. His concept does not rest on essentialist universals.After all, he is firmly against all essentialist views of religion. His universality is rooted instead in‘functional similarity’. He holds that it is possible to ‘determine a general concept capable of encom-passing the heterogeneous totality of facts and notions that . we habitually call religious . inas-much as these perform the same anthropological function’ (p. 199). This ‘functional homology’ isS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178125rooted in an extremely general similarity: cultures ‘possess a remarkable point in common in thesense that they all contribute . to constructing a particular world.. It is because each cultureresumes a world in itself that they all are globally similar and at the same time different’ (p. 202).Different cultures engage in parallel processes of constructing worlds drawing on the commonalitiesof lived experience.I think that this approach is headed in precisely the right direction, but it seems to placetoo much emphasis on discourse as the axis of comparison. In this sense, we might say thatDubuisson’s book is very French. To say that all cultures are similar in that they construct worldviews is an overly general claim. To suggest that the process of construction offers a basis forcomparison is valuable, but not enough is said about what this process is, and how we can ensurethat construction is in fact comparable across cultures. Why can it not be the case that incom-parable modes of construction are to be found in different cultures? Dubuisson spends muchmore time on criticising ‘religion’ than on developing this aspect of ‘cosmographic formations’.Given that ‘the world such as it really is and our own worlds are only abstractions deduceda posteriori’ and that our ‘representations of the world are a part of this fabric and are inseparablefrom it’, we must ask what point of view offers the comparative leverage that Dubuisson seeks(p. 204). Where do we stand to compare the processes that lead to the ‘bizarre, unexpected,ephemeral constructions’ that are cosmographic formations (p. 206)? The textualisation ofsome pre- (or trans-) linguistic reality, whether body or world, cannot provide this comparativeframe. Nor is it clear what precise processes of construction are being compared and where westand to identify them in a universally comparable mode.A less developed theme in Dubuisson’s book seems to offer a more promising avenue of com-parison: a linkage between individual agency and a broad concept of social, cultural and cosmicorder. Dubuisson’s account of cosmographic formations emphasises the agency of discursive‘Archetypical agencies’ are culturally specific conceptsdfor example, those ofconstruction.‘primitive’ and ‘progress’dthat are closely related to ‘religion’. This characterisation underlineshis equation of agency with conceptualisation or construction. The primary action he acknowl-edges is the act of description. He discusses action only insofar as it is textualised. On the onehand this position simply acknowledges the necessary role of discourse in academic work: a trea-tise on ritual presented by a mime would be more intriguing than useful. On the other hand thisposition does not force us to follow Dubuisson in privileging discourse as that which is compared.He insists that ‘religion’ must be abandoned because it should be an object, not a tool, of study.Yet he presents discourse as both object and tool. The point is not that we can stand outsidelanguage to get our hands on something more worth comparing than processes of discursive con-struction. Rather, the functional homology that grounds comparison can shift from an exclusivefocus on discourse to attention to the practical work of religion, with its ritual, social, political andeconomic effects.This greater emphasis on agency would require more dynamic sense of temporality, not inev-itable progress or the atemporality of radical relativism. But Dubuisson’s dichotomous view ofscience rules out this possibility. The natural sciences invoke progress, and the human sciences in-voke a relative temporality. Dubuisson contrasts ‘a timeless objective mind, concerned uniquelywith scientific rigor’ to ‘a historical community preoccupied above all with a concern to presentthe order that dominates its own conception of knowledge about the world’ (pp. 155, 71).He is certainly correct to flag the importance of community for the study of religion, but he126S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178presents a misleading dichotomy. He holds that the human sciences of religion are wrong to seethe object of their study as having any purchase on an objective world, as being engaged withprogress. Instead, he proposes ‘an ontology based on the sacrilegious categories of the mixedand interlaced, . the grandiose perspective of perpetual metamorphosis’ (p. 205). ‘Writing’ ofthe human sciences, he unhooks science from objective truth claims: ‘Scientific progress occursonly on the condition that the prejudices of an era are overcome and the walls of a traditionbreached’ (p. 176). This tactical and relative conception of progress is sharply opposed to theconception of progress, positivist found in the natural sciences. Our choice here is between unac-ceptable views of change: either radically situational or universally determined by an objectiveworld.This overdrawn dichotomy occludes the possibility of a richer concept of agency, which enactschange in a manner neither wholly determined nor radically free. Dubuisson ignores the middleground of a more relational concept of agency, where progress is measured not by convergenceon an absolute but in relation to ongoing engagement in the process of elaborating the rawmaterials of social and cosmic order. Emphasis on the agency of human beings, including socialscientists, would temper Dubuisson’s claim that ‘the world of science . lacks the ability tobecome a world for human life’ (p. 203). His exclusive focus on discourse leads to an overdrawndistinction between lived experience and texts.This is not to suggest that Dubuisson has nothing to say about ritual. But he discusses ritual astextualised rather than as part of a broader conception of agency’s role in the process of cosmo-graphic construction. He catches us up in discussions of myth and discourse, making valuablepoints, but failing to take broader sociological themes into account. To a large extent he is writingin the context of European studies of religion, where an emphasis on discourse is prominent.However, reintegrating these themes could strengthen his argument.To sum up, Dubuisson moves too far towards constructionism, and for two reasons: an overlysharp dichotomy between the natural and the human sciences, and an overemphasis on discourse.Discourse is, of course, central to processes of construction, but Dubuisson presents it as the ob-ject as well as the tool of study. A greater emphasis on other forms of action would broaden pos-sibilities for comparison. His argument, when reframed, makes an important contribution bycasting ‘religion’ in terms of agency and order. This theme lies at the heart of his concept of cos-mographic formations, but it is obscured by his ambiguous discussion of science and by his con-structionism. His claim that ‘religion is indefinable’ has merit, but his account of the raw materialsand of the process of cosmographic construction has problems in providing an account of a uni-versal cross-cultural frame for comparison (see p. 152). The frame seems either too general to gaina useful purchase or still too tied to Western academic perspectives.Once the overstated dichotomy between essentialism and radical constructionism is tempered,Dubuisson’s book makes an important contribution to the study of religion. With a clearer senseof what the discipline might consist of, we need not abandon ‘religion’ for ‘cosmographic forma-tion’ or any other term. We need merely clarify both what we mean by ‘religion’dwhether or notit conforms to typical understandings of that termdand the extent to which the concept containsepistemological, theological and ideological presuppositions. The Western Construction of Reli-gion, to the extent that it points beyond the forest of myth and discourse analysis to perceivedrelations between human actions on the one hand and social and cosmic order on the other,makes a valuable contribution to that effort.S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178127Haven’t we been here before? rehabilitating ‘religion’ in lightof Dubuisson’s critiqueAaron W. HughesDepartment of Religious Studies, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, CanadaE-mail address: hughesa@ucalgary.caOne of the most important of current trends emerging from the critical discourse on religion is thefull-scale questioning of the use of the term ‘religion’. Is the term helpful or insidious? Does it accu-rately fit the historical record of other cultures, or is it a Western will to power over them? Manyscholars have begun the process of documenting the overtly ideological, political and Protestant-based assumptions that form the foundation upon which the modern edifice of the academic studyof religion is constructed. Even though the history of religions has as its goal the noble dream ofcross-cultural understanding based on appropriate methodology, many would argue that theterm ‘religion’ has actually created an insurmountable cognitive dissonance because at the heartof the discipline resides a colonialist and orientalist agenda in which we inscribe ourselves andour values onto others.Dubuisson enters this discussion with his Western Construction of Religion. He argues that theacademic study of religion emerges at a particular moment in the development of Western civili-sation and that, like it or not, we ultimately remain prisoner to the genealogy of its terms, itstropes and its thinking about the world. For him, ‘religion’, as a Western construct, dictatesa set of antithesesdfor example, God/humanity, soul/body, sacred/profane and orthodox/heterodoxdthat help us understand Christianity, in the image of which they were initially crafted,but that are often irrelevant to other, especially non-Western, cultures. The result is that eventhough we think we have encountered and understood the Other on its own terms, all we havereally done is to document and discover ourselves. The academic study of religion is therefore aseries of hopelessly outmoded attempts to force misinterpreted and misconstrued data into acumbersome and biased theoretical framework.Dubuisson’s criticism revolves around the notion that the terms we employ to study the ‘being-in-the-world’ of other cultures are not innocuous. Whether or not we realise it, whether or not wechoose to acknowledge it, ideology haunts these terms. The task of purifying or demythologisingthese concepts and terms is a Sisyphean one. Dubuisson contends that the only solution to themalaise created by these terms and by the discourse that they undergird is to discard the entirefoundation upon which they rest. He is not content simply to problematise or interrogate the dis-cipline. He wants to establish a new foundation, one that allows for the construction of newarchitectonics.In place of ‘religion’, Dubuisson opts for ‘cosmographic formation’da term that for himavoids a term that the West has invented in its own image and has then projected onto differentcultures. Dubuisson argues that we should envisage the term ‘religion’ as the Western installmentof ‘cosmographic formation’. This new term will ideally avoid using the West as the referencepoint for understanding other cultures.I like Dubuisson’s critique. It is wonderfully provocative and self-critical. He offers a muchneeded, if by now increasingly familiar, challenge to the academic study of religion. Even those128S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178who disagree with him will be forced to wrestle with his thesis. I also appreciate his attempt toprovide not only a critique of the discipline but also a positive reconstruction.Yet, I am troubled by his heavy-handed dismissal of the term ‘religion’. Do we have to throwaway the term simply because some who have claimed to study religion ‘objectively’ have ap-pealed to all kinds of privileged categories and a historical comparisons? And more to the point,is this past tendency reflective of the discipline today?The history of religions is certainly a Western project. It is an Enlightenment activity that wasbased, in theory, on the acknowledgment of the superiority of reason over religion. Althoughmedieval Islam created a discourse that we can today label as ‘proto-comparative’, that discoursewas created to demarcate heresies or people to tax. The Other, according to this model, truly isOther, and this Otherness is, more often than not, based on metaphysical or ontological differ-ences between ‘us’ and ‘them’. Although some might argue that what we do today is not muchdifferent, I contend that it really is. For what is new with the modern academic study of religion,even in its nineteenth-century manifestation, is that the Other is not regarded as fundamentallydifferent but rather is conceived of as existing on a different level of some ‘evolutionary’ scale.As bothersome as we might find this evaluation today, we still need to appreciate what was orig-inal here and just how revolutionary it was for its time.Like it or not, we are the heirs to this discourse. Yet when done properly, the modern academicstudy of religion actually gives voice to, rather than silences, non-Western cultures. Admittedly,this discourse often forces non-Westerners to speak about their religions or cultures in waysthat seem forced or contrived, but this discourse need not be a colonialist imposition based onstereotypes or archetypes that we have created. On the contrary, this discourse enables conversa-tion between cultures. Certainly all knowledge is ultimately political, but this need not lead di-rectly into a colonialist agenda.In what follows, I hope to do two things: to show that Dubuisson’s critique of religion is notparticularly new, and to analyse his use of the term ‘cosmographic formation’. If I am correct,Dubuisson’s category is in danger of becoming as ‘Western’ and as ‘ideological’ as those who stillemploy ‘religion’. In short, before anyone engages in the dismantling of a discipline, we mustsurely see whether the critique upon which the dismantling is based is sound.Before examining Dubuisson’s employment of the term ‘cosmographical formation’, it is nec-essary to look more closely at his critique of the term ‘religion’. According to Dubuisson, theChristian West has developed a discourse of religion influenced by its own idiosyncratic historydfor example, the Gnostic ‘threat’ and the Crusades. There have been created show a number ofconceptsd‘God’, ‘church’, ‘faith’, ‘prayer’, ‘paradise’, ‘providence’, ‘crucifixion’, ‘communion’and ‘sin’dthat are considered canonical, or the sine qua non of religion. These terms were ulti-mately responsible for the formation of ‘religion’. Religion, in other words, did not antedate theseconcepts but instead was produced by them. Hubris, racial superiority and cultural ethnocentrismhave all led Western scholars to assume that all cultures must possess these concepts. And even ifother cultures do not possess the actual words for them, we have assumed that they must havesuch concepts. Consequently, we have translated, both literally and metaphorically, other textsand cultures into our own terms. The result, for Dubuisson, is self-affirmation, a reassurancethat the world works as we assume it does.To support his argument, Dubuisson pulls out the list of usual suspects, invoking the spectresof Otto, Durkheim, Eliade, Dumezil et al. As well formulated as his thesis may be, his critique isS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178129certainly not new. Indeed, much of it can be found in the work of Bruce Lincoln, J.Z. Smith, IvanStrenski and Russell McCutcheon not to mention their panoply of indictments and subsequentconvictions. Consequently, the hidden or silent assumptions in early and even relatively moderncomparative analysisdfor example, anti-Semitism and the privileging of a particular kind ofChristianitydare now well documented, and this acknowledgment is slowly becoming de riguer.So even though we have inherited the troublesome legacy of Eliade, it is not so simple an inher-itance as Dubuisson wants to claim.I think that Dubuisson misreads the theoretical study of religion at least as it has existed withincertain quarters in the North American Academy over the past ten to fifteen years. Increasingly,this study is highly, one could almost say obsessively, self-critical. Every term or category that ourpredecessors held deardfor example, ritual and sacreddhas undergone interrogation at the mostfundamental of levels. Even though the terms we use today may be the same as those of our pre-decessors, the trajectory from there to here has made their redeployment possible. Surely this re-depolyment answers Dubuisson’s charge that ‘all scientific study today ought to have as its sinequa non the critical, uncompromising study of its own language’ (p. 197).It is precisely this questioning of the tropes, terms, metaphors and genealogies that the disciplinehas bequeathed to us that is at the heart of the contemporary study of religion. This questioninghas been responsible for the shift in the history of religions from the global to the local. One nolonger sees monographs devoted to ‘patterns’ of religion. Instead, one frequently finds studies ofa particular text, a set of texts or a particular community, including certain conclusions that maybe of use to others working with different data but with similar problematics.The result is that we are slowly calling into question the autonomy of ‘religion’. The disciplinehas enough checks and balances that the racist, the fluffy and the harmful are ultimately weededout. Dubuisson, however, seems to be unconcerned with recent trends in the history of religions.A perusal of the references in his notes, for example, shows that his interest in theorists of religionstops around the mid 1980s.In place of ‘religion’ Dubuisson opts for the term ‘cosmographical formation’. Common toevery group, he argues, is the development and preservation of a ‘set of ideas, opinions, anddiverse theses, themselves passed on and deepened by images, symbols, and myths concerninghumankind, the world, and society’ (p. 69). Religion is the ‘cosmographic formation’ of theWest. Every culture, then, is not a ‘religion’ but a ‘cosmographic formation’ that tells its membersabout the world and about living meaningfully within it. But surely this substitution is just seman-tics. Has he not simply replaced the murkiness of ‘religion’ with an equally murky term? I am notconvinced that by changing the name, we have changed the reality.Dubuisson argues that every ‘cosmographic formation’ is its own world, which, although dif-ferent from any other, is nonetheless ‘structurally and functionally homologous’ to other worlds(p. 201). Is this not the same thing as saying that cultures are similar yet different, that religionsare similar yet different? Does the present-day academic study of religion really assume that, forexample, canon functions in the same way with the exact same modalities in oral and textual cul-tures? Do we truly presume that the interpretation of these canons will work in the same manner?Structural or functional homologues do not require jettisoning religion.‘Cosmographic formation’, from what I can tell, is religion minus the metaphysics and the var-ious polarities and dualisms that go with it. Humans are ‘thrown into’ the world and subsequentlyinterpret this world in ways that need not always refer back to transcendental Ideas. The modes of130S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178analysis to study such worlds is that of a phenomenological (presumably in the Heideggeriansense) anthropology that works on the level of ‘fleshy’ humans, upon whose bodies have been in-scribed the cultural and cosmographic values that compose their world. Dubuisson asks, ‘Why isour discipline so often content to see and invoke only conceptual ideas, transcendental categories,unconscious process, logical mechanisms?’ (p. 199). In their stead, he calls for an analysis of the‘tangible’, the ‘banal’ and the ‘explicit’. Implicit in this language is Heidegger’s philosophy of tem-porality, in which the true task of analysis is not to provide an intellectual grasp of the Absolute(a´ la theology) but to gain a deeper appreciation of human finitude. Both Dubuisson and Heidegger,in other words, contend that a theistic metaphysics is responsible for our inability to develop adeeper understanding of various human contexts and structures.I myself have frequently employed Heidegger and his existential ontology in my own work andhave found his to be much more fruitful than that which usually passes for phenomenology in thelikes of van der Leeuw and Eliade. But there is a price to pay. Heidegger’s anti-Semitism, involve-ment in Nazism and refusal to apologise explicitly after the war have made his legacy problematic.If I am correct in discerning a Heideggerian influence in Dubuisson’s work, we have to acknowl-edge that Heidegger is not only a Western philosopher but one worse in his support for fascismthan either Dumezil or Eliade. Certainly Heidegger is a much more profound thinker, but are wenot back to where we started: a Western edifice constructed on shaky ideological foundations?This observation aside, I agree with Dubuisson that there is a real historical bias in the aca-demic study of religion that privileges the order of philosophy and texts over the messiness of cul-ture. This bias has been changing over the past twenty years, especially since Geertz’s ‘Deep Play:Notes on the Balinese Cockfight’. But here again Dubuisson misreads the state of the field. Surelyhis call to replace ‘theology’ and Idealism with ‘anthropology’ and a Heideggerian-inspired phe-nomenology is not new. Yet it is under the category of theology and Idealism that Dubuisson sit-uates the contemporary academic study of religion. Again, maybe things are radically different inthe French Academy, but is not anthropology one of the major directions that the study ofreligion has taken in the North American academy?In the last twenty pages of his monograph Dubuisson sketches out his desiderata for the newdiscipline. The results are extremely mixed because he himself stays on the level of theory (a newmetaphysics?) rather than offering any specifics. How can we understand a group’s ‘being-in-the-world’ (Dubuisson’s/Heidegger’s term) or a culture without examining what Heidegger would callthe ‘existential ontology’ that structures lived and temporal worlds? Rather than ‘the things them-selves’, Dubuisson is more interested in how a cosmographical formation shows us, for example,‘a common world in which people live and age together’. Okay. But what does this mean? Weneed to be walked through a couple of examples to see ‘cosmographic formations’ in action. Oth-erwise we are left with very little to analyse.To conclude, it seems to me that Dubuisson is calling for a return to some form of anthropo-logically inspired area studies, where, each text or phenomenon can only be understood on its ownterms, as sui generis. Yet if we explain every culture simply on its own terms or the way it under-stands itself, are we better off? Is this not simply a return to W.C. Smith’s claim that it is our job toexplain a religion in such a manner that its practitioners can see themselves?Near the end of the work, Dubuisson writes that ‘The tenacity with which some will continue todefend the use of the word ‘religion’, perhaps for a long time, betrays a superstitious fear that withthe word might disappear the idea, too, that is, the very thing that it claims to designate’ (p. 200).S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178131I could not disagree more. Let me give an example. In calling Judaism a ‘religion’, in calling Islama ‘religion’, I do not, consciously or otherwise, invoke the good old days of colonialism and im-perialism. I acknowledge that the only way to understand these traditions is through sustainedphilological, historical, sociological and cultural analyses. I can call Muhammad a ‘prophet’,but I also acknowledge that how he is conceived to be a prophet for Muslims is both similarand dissimilar to that in either Christianity or Judaism. Likewise calling the Buddha a ‘prophet’and seeing how Buddhist constructions of the category prophet are both like and unlike Muslimconstructions of Muhammad neither blurs distinctions nor constitutes cultural imperialism. In-deed, in places such as South Asia, competing and overlapping constructions of the Buddhaand Muhammad have probably been bouncing off each other for centuries. Dubuisson’s frame-work seems to take little account of historical interactions between religions.Moreover, by replacing ‘religion’ with ‘cosmographic formation’, I am not convinced that weare better off. Every study of a religion, a culture or a group has to involve the importation ofcertain categories of analysis. Without categories, we simply describe. Analysis involves connect-ing such data to larger questions and issues.Dubuisson is calling for a revolution that has already happened. For younger scholars, includ-ing me, this is the only theoretical world that many of us have inhabited: self-reflexive, aware ofthe ontological baggage that ‘religion’ travels with, and attuned to our use of language. This iswhat I call ‘religion’, and I am not convinced, after reading Dubuisson’s call to arms, that weneed to abandon it.Dubuisson’s The Western Construction of ReligionRobert A. SegalSchool of Divinity, History and Philosophy, University of Aberdeen, King’s College, Aberdeen, AB24 3UB,Scotland, UKE-mail address: R.Segal@abdn.ac.ukIn its breadth, its erudition, its skepticism and not least its tenacity, Daniel Dubuisson’s TheWestern Construction of Religion represents the finest work to date on the ‘construction’ of reli-gion. Dubuisson does not simply invoke the notion of construction as a mantra but actuallystrives to trace the process. He seeks to show, not merely to assert, what ‘religion’ is constructedout of. Furthermore, he tries to demonstrate, not merely to assume, the limits of the constructedconcept. I have learned much from the book. Nevertheless, I disagree with many of his claims, andI want to explain why.The Western Construction of Religion lies at one end of the ‘use of ‘‘religion’’’ spectrum. At theother end lies J. Samuel Preus’ 1987 Explaining Religion. Preus takes for granted the suitability ofthe term ‘religion’. For him, the category identifies more or less obvious characteristics of a world-wide phenomenon. Where Dubuisson writes to challenge the universal applicability of the cate-gory ‘religion’, Preus writes to explain how the category has come to acquire its universalapplicability. Where Dubuisson spurns the category ‘religion’ on the grounds that it in fact nevergets beyond its Christian origins, Preus touts the category on the grounds that it eventually comesto encompass even Christianity. Where Dubuisson lambastes the social scientific study of religion132S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178as theology in disguise, Preus glories in the social scientific study of religion as liberation fromtheology.Preus traces the step-by-step emergence of the social scientific ‘paradigm’ out of the theologicalone. Initially, all religions get accounted for irreducibly religiously (Bodin, Herbert of Cherbury).Next all religions save Christianitydor save Judaism and Christianitydget accounted for non-religiously (Fontenelle, Vico). Finally, all religions get accounted for non-religiously (Hume, Comte,Tylor, Durkheim, and Freud). The social scientific paradigm is at last complete, though of courseever subject to revision.Preus credits the social sciences with forging the comparative approach that overcame Chris-tian ethnocentrism and thereby allowed for the recognition of the universality of religion. ForPreus, the identification of the universal category religion led to universal explanations of religion.In other words, it led to theorising. For Dubuisson, who never cites Preus, there has been no prog-ress, so that there is nothing to celebrate. Dubuisson insists that even those theorists who haveprided themselves on breaking with what Preus calls the theological paradigm have in fact notescaped from it. Theology has continued to ‘set the agenda’ for the study of religion. The onlysolution is the elimination of the category religion itself.Dubuisson begins by posing three questions:1. Is Christianity [not simply] the special form taken in the West by something that has alwaysexisted and that similarly exists elsewhere, if not everywhere, namely, religion or the religiousphenomenon?2. As the legitimate daughter of Christianity, is religion not rather than an element whollyunique to Western civilisation, one of its most original creations?3. Should we not, moreover, go somewhat farther and ask whether religion is not effectively theWest’s most characteristic concept, around which it has established and developed its identity,while at the same time defining its way of conceiving humankind and the world? (p. 9)His answers to these three questions are clear: 1. no, 2. yes and 3. yes. To cite one of his manysummary statements of his position:Whatever term we choosedweltanschauung, cosmography, vision, conception, figuration ofthe world, and so ondthe fact remains that all global conceptions of the world, all utopias,all messianic movements, all theologies, all the imaginary worlds that the West has conceivedof (and eventually tried to impose) have always been realised by taking as model (whether itwas admired, envied, hated, imitated, deformed, or denigrated) that or those promoted bythe Christian religion in its capacity of appearing to offer the most complete, most hege-monic conception of the world. (pp. 37e8)I demur.(1) If Christianity is the common model on which modern theorists have blindly based theirconception of religion, why have they differed with one another so sharply on their concep-tion of religion? For example, E. B. Tylor and Emile Durkheim, to name two theorists cited byDubuisson, begin their key works on religion (Primitive Culture [1st ed. 1871] and The ElementaryForms of the Religious Life [1912]) by rejecting the many standard definitions of religion offered byfellow theorists. How constricting can deference to Christianity be when so many theorists whopurportedly defer to it castigate one another’s definitions?S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178133(2) If Christianity is the common model on which theorists have ethnocentrically based theirconception of religion, how have they managed to find so many other cases of religion? One wouldthink that a model so particularisticdas Dubuisson’s answer to his first question claimsdwouldnever fit any other case, let alone hundreds of other cases.(3) Conversely, if Christianity is the common model on which theorists have blithely based theirconception of religion, why, as Preus shows, did it take them so long to find commonality? Onewould think that a model so readily presumed to be universal would easily fit, or be easily taken tofit, every other case.(4) If Christianity is the model on which theorists have based their conception of religion, whyhave so many theorists emphasised the differences between Christianity and other religions? True,Dubuisson would retort that those theorists are still using Christianity as the standard againstwhich they are measuring other religions:The Christian religion . rests on a system of antithetical categories or principles. It is par excel-lence the domain that constituted itself ‘against’ what was external to it (pagans, heretics, athe-ists, etc.), while at the same time defining itself through a series of clear-cut dichotomies. Of thesecomplementary orders, the principle [sic] expressions have long since been enumerated and havebecome commonplace in our anthropological and theological thought: true religion/false reli-gions; orthodoxy/heresies; soul/body; God/humanity; magic/religion; reason/revelation;knowledge/faith; theology/anthropology; believer/atheist; clergy/laity; sacred/profane or reli-gious/profane; monotheism/polytheism; papacy/empire; religion/science, and so on. (p. 105)But why cannot one argue contrarily that the openness to departures from the Christian normshows that theorists are capable of rejecting that norm?For example, William Robertson Smith devotes his Lectures on the Religion of the Semites (1sted. 1889) to showing how different Christianity has always been from the ‘primitive’ Semitic stateout of which it emerged. Whereas for Smith early Semitic religion was materialist, ritualistic, col-lectivist and amoral, Christianity from the start, even if still more so since the Reformation, hasbeen spiritual, creedal, individualist and scrupulously moral. So great for Smith is the hiatus be-tween lower and higher religions that only revelation can account for the leap. And in his firstlecture he warns against viewing primitive religion as if it were like Christianity:And here we shall go very far wrong if we take it for granted that what is the most importantand prominent side of religion to us was equally important in the ancient society with whichwe are to deal.. Our modern habit is to look at religion from the side of belief rather than ofpractice.. Thus the study of religion has meant mainly the study of Christian beliefs, andinstruction in religion has habitually begun with the creed, religious duties being presentedto the learner as flowing from the dogmatic truths he is taught to accept. All this seems tous so much a matter of course that, when we approach some strange or antique religion,we naturally assume that here also our first business is to search for a creed, and find in itthe key to ritual and practice. But the antique religions had for the most part no creed;they consisted entirely of institutions and practices. (Smith, 2002, p. 16)It is the ultra-devout Christian Smith who warns fellow scholars against automatically takingChristianity as the model of religion universally. Christianity, together with Judaism and Islam,is for him different from all other religions. Smith here sounds just like Dubuisson!134S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178(5) Not to be overlooked either is J. G. Frazer, who in The Golden Bough (1st ed. 1890; 2nded. 1900; 3rd ed. 1911e15) aims to show not that primitive religions are like Christianity but theopposite: that the seemingly higher Christianity is really just another primitive vegetation cult,simply the most successful one. Yes, Frazer is leveling all religions to their lowest common de-nominator, but he is doing so to make Christianity primitive, not to make primitive religionChristian-like. (In his Folk-lore in the Old Testament [1918] he does the same to biblicalJudaism.)(6) If theorists have based their conception of religion on a single religion, why have so manytheorists stressed the differences between kinds and between stages of religion? For Tylor, prim-itive religion is materialist, explanatory and amoral, whereas modern religion is spiritual, meta-physical and moral. For Tylor, primitive religion is like science, and modern religion is unlikeit. For Lucien Le´ vy-Bruhl, who goes unmentioned in Dubuisson, Tylor is wrong to assumethat the mentality underlying primitive religion is the same as that underlying science. For EmileDurkheim, whom Dubuisson does consider, the change from mechanical to organic solidaritymakes for changes in the nature of religion. For Max Weber, also considered by Dubuisson, prim-itive, or magical, religion has no gods, priests, ethics or metaphysics. It is concerned with imme-diate, worldly ends. By contrast, higher religion has gods, priests or prophets, ethics andmetaphysics. It is preoccupied with the need for meaningfulness. How are these theorists anyless attentive to differences within the category of religion than is Dubuisson in his proposed re-placement of ‘cosmographical formations’ for religions: ‘All cultures are thereby similar, and like-wise, all are different’ (p. 201)?(7) While Dubuisson, to his credit, does not take the postmodern route of dispensing altogetherwith categories, or similarities, his criticism of the category religion does appeal to the litany-likeargument made by particularists against comparativists. Dubuisson asks rhetorically, ‘Does thefact that a human beingda Benedictine monk, a Roman augur, or Tungus shamandaddressesa supernatural suffice to authorise us to speak of a common religious phenomenon?’ (p. 13).He thereby echoes Clifford Geertz, particularist par excellence:[T]he notion that the essence of what it means to be human is most clearly revealed in thosefeatures of human culture that are universal rather than in those that are distinctive to thispeople or that is a prejudice we are not necessarily obliged to share. Is it in grasping suchgeneral factsdthat man has everywhere some sort of ‘religion’dor in grasping the richnessof this religious phenomenon or thatdBalinese trance or Indian ritualism, Aztec human sac-rifice or Zun˜ i rain-dancingdthat we grasp him? Is the fact that ‘marriage’ is universal (if it is)as penetrating a comment on what we are as the facts concerning Himalayan polyandry, orthose fantastic Australian marriage rules, or the elaborate bride-price systems of BantuAfrica? The comment that Cromwell was the most typical Englishman of his time preciselyin that he was the oddest may be relevant in this connection, too: it may be in the culturalparticularities of peopledin their odditiesdthat some of the most instructive revelations ofwhat it is to be generically human are to be found. (Geertz, 1973, p. 43)When Dubuission declares that ‘If we do not respect the structural uniqueness of each culturalcontinuum, all cultures in effect become comparable, but at the price precisely of that which madethem unique’ (p. 65), he also almost mimics Geertz’s charge that generalisations miss the distinc-tiveness of the particulars they amass:S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178135Within the bloated categories of regime description, Feudalism or Colonialism, Late Capi-talism or The World System, Neo-Monarchy or Parliamentary Militarism, there is a residentsuchness, deep Moroccanicity, inner Indonesianness, struggling to get out. Such a conceptionof things is usually called nationalism. That is certainly not wrong, but, another bloated cat-egory, grouping the ungroupable and blurring distinctions internally felt, it is less definitethan it seems. Every quiddity has its own form of suchness, and no one who comes toMorocco or Indonesia to find out what goes on there is likely to confuse them with eachother or to be satisfied with elevated banalities about common humanity or a universalneed for self-expression. (Geertz, 1995, p. 23)To begin with, this argument is tautological: of course, similarities cannot identify differences,for if similarities could, they would not be similarities. But this argument is also question-begging:only if one presupposes that differences are somehow deeper than similarities can one dismiss sim-ilarities as superficial. If one were to presuppose that differences are trivial, then they becomesuperficial. Moreover, similarities are by no means confined to the surface. They often lie beneaththe surface. An emigre´ to a foreign country is typically struck first by the differences between itand home, and only later comes to notice the similarities. And apparent differences can turninto underlying similarities.(8) At the same time similarities do not mean identities. Similarities mean no more than simi-larities. Similarities allow for differences, and exactly at the point at which no further similaritiescan be found. No one claims that Christianity is identical with Buddhism or Christianity of onetime and place identical with Christianity of another. Rather, the claim is that they are akin, andsufficiently akin to be categorisable as cases of religion and in turn explicable similarly.It is a logical truism that any two entities, however much alike, are still distinct. Therefore thecategorisation of phenomena as cases of religion can never yield identity, only similarity. Even toseek only similarities is not to eliminate differences. Conversely, to seek only differences is not toeradicate similarities. The options are neither wholesale identity nor total uniqueness but only fur-ther similarities or further differences.Like Geertz, Dubuisson counters vaunted similarities with sheer differences:In the minds of many for whom religion in the final instance means communication with su-perhuman interlocutors, there can no doubt about it, so seemingly similar are these varioussituations. In reality, matters are neither so simple nor so obvious. What is scientifically com-parable in this instance is solely the fact that these people address themselves to an imaginarybeing that their own pronouncements in some fashion transform into a real interlocutor, anda close analysis of the varying cultural and pragmatic contexts would quickly reveal impor-tant, irreconcilable differences. (p. 13)But those who seek similarities do not deny differences. They deny the importance of differences.To argue from the fact of differences, which are never denied, to the importance of them is to begthe question: why are differences more significant than similarities? The argument in favor of sim-ilaritiesdthat similarities are weightier than differencesdmay be question-begging, but so is theargument in favor of differences: that differences are deeper than similarities. Geertz’s askingwhether the universality of marriage is ‘as penetrating a comment on what we are as the facts con-cerning Himalayan polyandry, or those fantastic Australian marriage rules, or the elaborate136S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178bride-price systems of Bantu Africa’ is a less rhetorical question than he realises (see Segal, 2001,p. 350).(9) Because Dubuisson, despite his seeming dismissal of similarities and therefore of categories, infact wants to find more suitable similarities and therefore more suitable categories, he cannot befaulted, the way postmodernists can, with failing to see the indispensability of similarities. As Ihave argued elsewhere, similarities and categories, which is to say comparisons, are indispensableto the explanation of specific cases, no matter how unique (see Segal, 2001). The quest for differencesdepends as much on similarities as the quest for similarities does. Geertz himself compares Indonesiawith Morocco in order to illuminate the differences between them (see Geertz, 1968).(10) Just as similarities do not mean identities, so they do not mean essences, which Dubuissonnevertheless equates:Only a cavalier, superficial vision would be capable of ignoring these radical differences[among Siberian shamanism, Roman augury, and Christian monasticism] in order to recog-nize, despite everything, the ghost of one and the same anthropological fact. On this wewould probably all agree. It is consequently obvious that the essence of religion. is to befound neither in restricted, delimited experience. nor in totalized complexes. (p. 14)But similarities are merely empirical claims, whereas essences are metaphysical ones. No theorist,however brash, claims to have uncovered the essence of religion. At most, theorists claim to haveidentified the necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of religion, and few theoristsclaim to have identified both. Indeed, most explanations are merely probabilistic (see Segal,2001, pp. 356e7). While the essence of any category would obviously have to be universal,universal characteristics need not be essential ones. Saying that a table must have four legs isnot saying that four legs are the essence of a table. The postmodern ‘anti-essentialism’ socommonplace today is thus misplaced.(11) If theorists assume the universality of religion, why do so many of them assume thatreligion faces extinction? Dubuisson quotes Tylor on the antiquity of religion. But even thoughTylor does maintain that, as far as reliable records show, there has always been religion (see Tylor,1958, II, p. 9), he hardly maintains that there will always be religion. He pits religion against sci-ence, animism against materialism. Science has bested religion from the physical world and hasforced religion to retreat to the domain of either metaphysics or ethicsdboth of them for Tylorcome-down. Tylor even investigates spiritualism as a possible way of saving religion.For Freud, religion has proved hard to dislodge, but not impossible, and in The Future of anIllusion (1927) he envisions a world with science in place of religion. Durkheim seeks secularreligion or the cult of the individual as a substitute for the loss of traditional religion, whichagain has been bested by science. Weber laments that religion is dying out, and with nothingto replace it. Jung laments the same, though he offers psychology as the substitute for religion.The precariousness of religion in the modern world for so many leading theorists hardly be-speaks confidence in its universalitydunless universality is taken to mean merely that every cul-ture has at least had religion, not will always have religion. Even Mircea Eliade, who isDubuisson’s bete noir, has to scamper to find what he concedes are degenerated, corrupt formsof religion amidst modernity.(12) If theorists assume the irreducibility of religion, why do they account for both its originand its function non-religiously? For all social scientists, religion originates and functions to serveS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178137secular ends. And whatever end is named reflects the disciplinedthe discipline outside of religiousstudiesdfrom which the theorist hails. Far from isolating religion, social scientists link it to some-thing elsedsociety, culture, or the mind. For some theorists, religion fulfills its function admirably(Tylor, Jung); for others (Durkheim), indispensably; for yet others, disastrously (Freud). Still, forall, religion is a secular product, and its longevity derives from its effectiveness in fulfilling its sec-ular function. Against whom, then, is Dubuisson pitting himself in stating that ‘From the outset,the accumulation of evidence in this book has established a hypothesis that religion is not a simple,obvious phenomenon of which it suffices to say that it exists sui generis as one of the fundamentalcharacteristics of humanity’ (p. 189)? Against the religionist tradition of Mu¨ ller, Van der Leeuw,Otto and Eliade? Yes. Against any of the social sciences? No.Social scientists start with the stage before religion and seek to account for the emergence ofreligion. Whatever origin they postulate must be non-religious because that origin necessarily an-tedates religion. Once for them religion arises, they seek to account for the persistence of reli-giondfor Preus, the distinctively social scientific issue. Whatever function they propose mustlikewise be non-religious because that function is the fulfillment of the need that gave rise to re-ligion. I therefore fail to see any beholdenness on the part of social scientists to religiosity or toChristianity. Religion, including Christianity, is the subject of study, not the student. The aim is tomake religion as nearly non-religious in its origin and function as possible. The aim is to reducereligion as nearly as possible to something secular.(13) Almost in passing, Dubuisson asserts that ‘for many Western minds, denying the idea ofreligion is tantamount to denying the existence of the divinity’ (p. 55). But however commonly thislinkage is invoked, it is atypical of theorists of religion, most of whom vaunt what Peter Bergershould have called ‘methodological agnosticism’ rather than ‘methodological atheism’. Put sum-marily, theorists strive to account for religion, not for god. They seek to explain the origin andfunction of belief in god but not of god himself/herself/itself.(14) Dubuisson evinces his expertise in matching up modern theories with ancient onesdforexample, matching up the Sophist Critias with Marx (see, for example, p. 136). I agree thatsome modern theories do have hoary counterparts. But what makes modern theories, at leastsocial scientific ones, distinctively modern is their basis in evidence rather than in speculation.The differences summed by the anthropologist John Beattie apply to the other social sciencesas well:Thus it was the reports of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century missionaries and travellers inAfrica, North America, the Pacific and elsewhere that provided the raw material upon whichthe first anthropological works, written in the second half of the last century, were based.Before then, of course, there had been plenty of conjecturing about human institutionsand their origins.. But although their speculations were often brilliant, these thinkerswere not empirical scientists; their conclusions were not based on any kind of evidence whichcould be tested; rather, they were deductively argued from principles which were for the mostpart implicit in their own cultures. They were really philosophers and historians of Europe,not anthropologists. (Beattie, 1964, pp. 5e6)(15) It may well be that all attempts at finding a categorisation of religion that fits all assumedcases have failed. But the corrective is not to abandon the attempt. The corrective is to try anew.To jump from the difficulty of finding commonality to the impossibility of doing so is illogical. To138S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178jump from impossibility to impropriety, as not Dubuisson but many postmodernists do, is to leapfrom ‘is’ to ‘ought’.(16) Finally, what is the force of the claim, made by Dubuisson and so many others, that thecategory religion is ‘constructed’? What is the alternative: revealed? Unless the category was al-ready in the world when humans arrived, of course it was created. And of course it was createdby someone at some time and place. Are scientific theories, which Dubuisson contrasts to socialscientific ones, any less constructed? The issue is not the specificity of the origin of a categorybut its applicability beyond its origin. To restrict the applicability of a category or of a theoryto the time and place of its origin is to commit the genetic fallacy. It is to collapse discoveryinto invention. To take a common example, Freud undeniable generalised from the cases of largelymiddle-class Viennese Jewish women at the turn of the twentieth century. The issue is whether hisuniversalisation still holds. To assume that it does not because of its constricted origin is fallacious.To avoid the genetic fallacy, Dubuisson must actually prove, not simply assert, the following claim:the history of religions . was itself a unique historical construction, intimately tied to theideas of its time, on which it was dependent at every stage of development.. The studyof its first syntheses, drawn up in the second half of the nineteenth century, reveals, amongthe intellectual factors that surrounded its birth, the constant presence of the most ordinaryprejudices of that period. (p. 147)Certainly Dubuisson does seek to prove these claims. The question, which will not be answeredhere, is whether he ever falls back on the sheer specificity of the period of origin as an argumentagainst the applicability of the category religion or of theories of religion.Comments on Daniel Dubuisson’s The WesternConstruction of ReligionAnn TavesDepartment of Religious Studies, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-3130, USAE-mail address: taves@religion.ucsb.eduAs Steven Engler notes, Dubuisson goes beyond the arguments of authors such as Talal Asad,Russell McCutcheon and Timothy Fitzgerald in arguing (1) that ‘religion filled an ‘architectonicfunction’ in Western culture’ and (2) that in order to escape this past, we need to replace the con-cept of religion with that of ‘cosmographic formations’. In referring to religion as filling an ‘ar-chitectonic function’, Dubuisson does not mean to suggest that other cultures have not askedsimilar questions or engaged in similar practices but rather that the West conferred on the com-plex of ideas and behaviours that it deemed religious ‘a kind of destiny or essential anthropolog-ical vocation: humans are held to be religious in the same way they are omnivorous, that is, bynature, through the effects of an inborn disposition’ (p. 12). It is this ‘anthropological vocation’that Dubuisson hopes to escape from through the use of the new term ‘cosmographic formations’.While Dubuisson repeatedly returns to the point that ‘religion is not a simple, obvious phenom-enon of which it suffices to say that it exists sui generis as one of the fundamental characteristics ofS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178139humanity’ (p. 189), this point was not in dispute among his commentators at the annual meeting.Disagreements instead clustered around two issues, one historical and the other methodological:first, whether Dubuisson provides an adequate characterisation of the history of the concept of re-ligion either in the history of the West or in the modern era; and second, whether the concept needsto be replaced. Others in this symposium raised questions about the adequacy of Dubuisson’s his-tory, and none appears interested in replacing the concept of religion with ‘cosmographic forma-tions’. Although for Dubuisson the historiographical and methodological issues are joined, Ithink that the discussion can be advanced more effectively if they are separated. Since other contrib-utors address the historiographical question at some length, I will focus on the methodological is-sues related to the use of the term ‘religion’. I argue that whether we employ the term should bedecided on the basis of the questions we want to ask and the methods that are most appropriatefor answering them, not on the history of the use of the term.Dubuisson’s underlying question has to do with human universals. He insists that we need toreplace the concept of ‘religion’ with that of ‘cosmographic formations’ because he cannot see‘[h]ow a concept so determined by its exclusively Christian and western history [can function]as a universal paradigm in the study of humanity’.4 Bracketing the question of whether the con-cept of religion was or is largely determined by an exclusively Christian and Western history, weneed to recognise that Dubuisson’s interest is not so much in ‘religion’, whatever that means, as inuniversal paradigms that can be used to study humanity. Like the theologians and phenomenol-ogists he criticises, Dubuisson is interested in human universals. But in contrast to them, he doesnot view humans as naturally and therefore universally religious. Thus he thinks that we need toemploy a more encompassing term that truly is universally applicable. He proposes ‘cosmographicformations’ because the phrase not only ‘includes what in the West, we call ‘‘religions,’’ but . canalso apply to the cosmographies of atheists, agnostics and materialists’.5Whether we follow Dubuisson in adopting a term such as cosmographic formations depends, asfar as I can see, on what we as individual scholars are trying to accomplish. If we want to comparea variety of ‘world constructing’ strategies, some commonly considered religious and others not, ashe wants to do, then a broadly encompassing term such as ‘cosmographic formations’, which doesnot require a definition of religion, seems to be required. If our goal is to study what we take to bereligion, then we will be obliged to provide a definition of religion, either substantive or heuristic.Dubuisson rejects this second option because he thinks that previous efforts to ground religion asan analytical category have been founded on arbitrary distinctions (pp. 76e8, 189e90). Westernthinkers, he argues, have excluded ‘from the putative religious field magic, divination, hero cults,popular superstitions, alchemy and astrology, and it remains quite uncomfortable when it meetsthem among others, at the heart of what it, despite everything, calls religions’ (p. 190). In his viewwe should either accept this whole range of phenomena as ‘authentic religious facts’ or persist ‘inexcluding them from this sphere’ and found our ‘analytical categories on arbitrary distinctions’(p. 190). I suggest that we can concede up front that the concept of ‘religion’ is founded on disputed,if not arbitrary, distinctions, so that identifying ‘authentic religious facts’ will always be a theoreti-cally, if not theologically, laden enterprise. This concession does not, however, preclude studyingwhat we define as religion. It simply requires us to acknowledge the limitations inherent in our4 Daniel Dubuisson, e-mail comments on AAR panel abstracts, November 2004, trans. Steven Engler.5 Daniel Dubuisson, e-mail response to comments of Steven Engler, November 2004, trans. Steven Engler.140S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178definitions, not the least of which is that our definitions tell us more about what we as scholars take asreligion, substantively or heuristically, than about the views of our subjects.In saying this, I do not mean to downplay the import of Dubuisson’s observation that Westernthinkers have excluded any number of phenomena from the realm of ‘religion’ on arbitrarygrounds. This important observation raises the crucial question of what counts as ‘religion’and why. This question, like Dubuisson’s question about universals, is one that cannot be ad-dressed if we start with a definition of ‘religion’. To answer this question, we need to identifya common feature of the set of phenomena in questiondreligion, magic, divination, hero cults,etc.dfor the purposes of comparison. This feature would not have to coincide with what scholarsor their subjects take to be religion.In his introductory chapter, Dubuisson briefly considers and then rejects a definition of religionthat he considers more logical and scientific than most but that proponents of the universality ofreligion would consider too broad. If, however, we are interested in the question of what counts asreligion, a stipulated focus on occasions in which ‘people address themselves to an imaginarybeing that their own pronouncements in some fashion transform into a real interlocutor’ (p. 13)would make an excellent starting point. The knowledge that imaginary beings are invoked ‘inthe most diverse contexts (magical rituals, sorcery, alchemy, superstitions, spiritism, demonic pos-session, childish beliefs, fetishistic practices, hallucinatory neuroses, paranoid or amorous delir-ium and so on)’ (pp. 13e14) would be an advantage rather than a liability. Moreover, if theserelated concepts are not any more stable than religiondand I doubt that they aredthen a focuson occasions when people address themselves to imaginary beings would allow us to focus on theprocesses of category formation of religion, magic and divination that are typically suppressedwhen we begin with a definition of religion.Methodologically, I would argue that Dubuisson’s call to replace the concept of ‘religion’ with thatof ‘cosmographic formations’ is rooted in his desire to ask questions about human universals that def-initions of religion tend to suppress. His questions, however, are not the only questions that can beasked. We should decide whether to use the concept of religion as an overarching scholarly rubricfor to particular scholarly questions. Viewed in light of his own scholarly questions, Dubuisson’scall makes sense. Moreover, his critical appraisal of the concept challenges us to recognise the limi-tations inherent in the use of the term ‘religion’ and to consider asking questions that may encompasswhat we or others take to be religion under broader headings.Critique and challenge: some remarks onDaniel Dubuisson’s critique of the concept of religionWilhelm Dupre´Emeritus, Department of Philosophy and Theology, University of Nijmegen, Kroonsingel 41, 6581 BL,Malden, The NetherlandsE-mail address: dupre@kabelfoon.nlDaniel Dubuisson’s provocative work is marked by a double objective. On the one hand heaims at a radical reassessment of the history of religions as a discipline of the human sciences,S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178141and of the concept of religion as the basis and indication of Religious Studies programs; on theother hand, he seeks to comply with the demands of an adequate anthropology that is entirely intune with the human situation and with an epistemology that accords with basic experiences. Thetension between these goals runs like an invisible thread through the whole text. It shapes itsvision and gives body to its arguments. In the connection of extremes, this tension reveals itselfas a source of amazing creativity.In the following review I want to concentrate on four themes: first, the critical intention of theauthor and the thesis he intends to defend; second, the meaning of religion in Western traditionand as a typical construction of this tradition; third, objections against Dubuisson’s approach;and fourth, the study of cosmographic formations as a necessary feature of cultural reality.Task and thesisThe main concern of Dubuisson’s book is the meaning of religion and the usability of the con-cept of religion as the name for a particular discipline and as the subject of cross-cultural inves-tigations. Dubuisson is convinced that ‘religion is not only the central concept of Westerncivilisation, it is the West itself in the process of thinking the world dominated by it, by its cate-gories of thought’ (p. 93). In order to understand both the history of Western conquests and theimpact of hegemonic tendencies, we have to remember that ‘through the idea of religion, the Westcontinuously speaks of itself to itself, even when it speaks of others. For when it does so, it is im-plicitly in relation to the perfected model that it thinks itself to be. This is narcissistic objectifica-tion’ (p. 95). And conversely: if we concentrate on the history of religions as one of the disciplinesof human sciences, we have to acknowledge that this discipline not only is a child which has beenformed within the context of religious entanglements but perpetuates these entanglements by add-ing the glamour of apparently scientific reasoning.In the light of his assessment of Western religion, Dubuisson argues for the abandonment ofthis concept ‘and, with it, everything that is conventionally attached to it’ (p. 51). As an alterna-tive, he proposes ‘to organise the nascent discipline around a more neutral concept (in a word, oneless European), which might have been capable of subsuming the whole of what are here calledcosmographic formations, in order to give the discipline truly universal status’ (p. 90). Withthe concept of cosmographic formations he defends the vision of ‘a vaster anthropological per-spective’ which enables us ‘to subsume the totality of human activities whose objective is the cre-ation, preservation, or consolidation of all-encompassing symbolic universes, capable of receivingand lending sense (value, orientation and a rationale) to the totality of human facts’ (p. 51).To achieve this goal, it will be necessary to revise the anthropological premises that lie at thebottom of the human sciences and to connect them with an epistemology that accords with thebasic condition of being human and that does not close its eyes to the atrocities which havebeen committed by ideological prejudices. We must learn to differentiate the various planesand levels of the complexity we are studying. Otherwise intellectual activities are doomed to ‘re-main sterile’ (p. 138).Dubuission does not want to be caught in the great (dichotomous) paradigm of Western think-ing (Plato, Lucretius). He abhors metaphysical malaise (p. 40) and refuses to have recourse to the‘Platonic paradise of eternal ideas’ (p. 164). But he also knows that it would be imprudent to skipor to repress these issues: ‘Metaphysical concerns, even anxiety, as well as everything that derives142S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178from them, belong integrally to the history of humanity. This is why, as long as the human sci-ences persist in excluding from the symbolic productions they chose to study the metaphysicalcomponent that they containdthat they contain only because they are fully human creationsdjust as long, I fear, they will also fail to grasp what is perhaps the essential characteristic of allhuman activity, no doubt made up of other than simple utilitarian concerns, and they will thencut themselves off from a good portion of their critical objective’ (p. 233). If we respond to thehuman situation as it presents itself throughout history, no less is required than ‘an ontologybased on the sacrilegious categories of the mixed and interlaced, themselves returned to the gran-diose perspective of perpetual metamorphosis, an interminable gestation’ (p. 205).The burden of traditionTo prove his thesis, Dubuisson concentrates on the genesis of the concept of religion. Thoughthe Latin term religio precedes the emergence of Christianity, its meaning underwent dramaticchanges when Christian apologists, especially Augustine, adopted this term and connected itwith the belief that their religion was the true, and the only true, religion. If the cults and creedsof other traditions were not outrightly false (which they were), they were definitively inferior andtherefore unsuited to be treated on equal footing with Christianity. Since Christians believed inthe same divine origin of all human beings, this attitude created its own paradoxes. On the onehand there could be no doubt that the basic features of human nature appear in all people. Onthe other hand it was equally clear that the Christian view of nature provided the only valid stan-dards for the assessment of others. Since this gift was given by revelation and not by nature, onehad to find something that the others lacked or that existed only in distorted forms.In analysing the missionary, political and intellectual conquests of the West, Dubuisson sees ‘aclose, genetic relationship between the historical destiny of Christianity in the West and the recon-struction of the idea of religion with its very specific signification’ (p. 102). In retrospect, he con-tends, we have to grant that ‘religion is effectively the West’s most characteristic concept, aroundwhich it has established and developed its identity, while at the same time defining its way of con-ceiving humankind and the world’ (p. 9). But to be precise, we have to add that ‘while religionremains largely the incarnation of an atemporal notion or indestructible essence, it is, more pro-saically put, only the result of a discriminatory act performed in the West and there alone’ (p. 14).Religion is an idea through which the West ‘has constrained other cultures to speak of their ownreligions by inventing them for them’ (p. 93). ‘What the West and the history of religions in itswake have objectified under the name ‘religion’ is then something quite unique, which could beappropriate only to itself and to its own history’ (p. 90). In giving ‘religion to the world’, theWest necessitated the world to give it back, ‘to the West’s greater glory’ (p. 114).The central point in Dubuisson’s argument is the theological appropriation of cult and creed in theconcept of (true) religion to the extent that this concept became the focus of Christian identity andbecame a substitute for the life that this concept claimed to understand. In the process of this trans-formation, religion came to represent the ‘core or central axis’ of the world in which, and with which,the West developed. ‘This is why it seems to us as indispensable as it is irreplaceable’ (p. 89).To the extent that the theological appropriation of cult and creed generated the myth of reli-gion as one of the cosmographic elements of the Western world, Dubuisson is right to rejectthe concept of religion as a disciplinary focus of human sciences, especially when this conceptS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178143is based on a strict and rigid model that claims to be absolute as well as universal. In castigatingthis ‘ephemeral universalism’ (p. 140), he opens valuable perspectives that expose the distortingimpact of Western attitudes on the world, as well as on Western scholarship inasmuch as thatrelationship it perpetuates these attitudes. His analysis of symbolic interactions and their netsof relations presents itself as a conceptual mirror which reveals the caricatures of the human sci-ences and especially of religious studies. But does his approach also do justice to the meaning ofreligion as a cultural reality which, even as part of the Western heritage, has nevertheless a life ofits own independent of theological transformations, and despite the deeply influence on it by thehistory of these transformations? I do not think that it does, and for the following reasons.ObjectionsSince one of the arguments against the Western concept of religion is the supposed inability ofother traditions to recognise themselves in the categories of religious scholarship, it would only befair to ask whether religious people in the West do recognise themselves in these categories. Idoubt that they do for the simple reason that religious people in the West do not necessarily be-lieve that other religions are wrong or that they are religions only to the extent that they share inthe same rigid and timeless essence as Western religions. But even more important in this contextis the distinction between ideas with which people live and ideas which are used and developed inorder to understand the various expressions, forms and modes of being human and cultural. Isorely miss this distinction in this and numerous other books. Neglecting it is a cause of manyconfusions. An example in Dubuisson’s book is the discussion of a distinct religious domain(p. 43). If we consider the ways in which the conflicts of the religious wars have been solved, itis true that the West invented the separation of powersdof state and church, of the privateand the public spheres. The institutionalisation of this invention is a Western idiosyncrasy thatmight or might not be comparable with solutions developed by other traditions. But the situationis different when we enter the theoretical plane and distinguish various areas of variously relatedmeanings. The distinctions and non-distinctions that we observe in various traditions are not ir-relevant and have to be accounted for on the level of theoretical considerations. But they are notdecisive as far as theoretical distinctions are concerned. Whether such distinctions are adequate is,again, a question of theoretical considerations and of our evaluation of the adequacy of ourtheories.Another feature that I miss in the book concerns the emergence and development of philosoph-ical and scientific thinking in the West. Dubuisson is not afraid to confront the reader with thespiritual heroes of Western history and the mental dynamics that they have initiated, but the ‘in-vention’ of philosophy as a particular way of thinking in which reason relates to itself and unfoldswithin the horizon of the myth of being as being remains dim. The ‘underexposure’ of this feature,though in itself nothing to complain about, is nevertheless disturbing because the whole history ofChristian and Western thinking is marked by the fusion of ‘God’ with ‘Being’ and by tensions thatfusion has caused to the unfolding of reason within a double horizon of ultimate meaning. Theeffects of this tension also concern the concept of religion and the idea of studying other traditionsnot merely in the light of the god-symbol (or of its negation) but in the light of Being as well. If wedisregard this feature, an important aspect of the concept of religion and of what has been donewith it will be obscured.144S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178A key argument for the typically Western conception of religion is the distinction of Arnobiusbetween ‘our’ and ‘their’ religion (p. 25). Dubuisson points out that the Romans ‘sought to co-optthe goodwill of the gods of an enemy city’, that ‘the Greeks spoke of the Egyptian gods with thegreatest respect’, and that this is ‘equally true of the Jews of the Old Testament’ (p. 28). This claimmight be partly true, but it did not hinder the Greeks from inventing the concept of magia as thedenigrating designation of Persian cults or hinder Jews from proclaiming that the heathen ‘idols’have mouths but cannot speak, eyes but cannot see . and that ‘they that make them are like untothem; so is every one that trusteth in them’. Nor did Cicero abstain from observing ‘that each cityand state has its own religio’ and that ‘we have ours’ (Pro L. Flacco Oratio. nr. 69). I agree withDubuisson that the difference between our own gods and the gods of other people ‘ought toprompt us to regard exotic cultures with a curious eye instead of persisting in describing themby means of our unique religious code’ (p. 28). But neither should we disregard the observationof the reversal of devas and ahuras (asuras), or the recurring pattern of seeing in the gods ofneighbours the devils of one’s own tradition.Another point concerns the theological appropriation of cult and creeds. The confusions anddistortions that have been part of this appropriation, in the cultivation of actual religiosity andthe theoretical assessment of its manifestations, deserve Dubuisson’s scorn. They underlinea problem that has haunted Western history and that still causes practical as well as theoreticalturbulences. But the problem is not exclusively Christian. It was already present in ancientGreece when Xenophanes and the Sophists approached religious beliefs as a variation on theirphilosophy, instead of letting them be what they were. Plato stressed the necessity of having andfollowing true theology (Republic II, 379a). And Aristotle distinguished theology as ‘the highestscience’ which is ‘universal’ because the ‘separable’ nature of the ‘eternal and immovable’ is thefirst we can think of (Metaphysics VI.1, 1026a). The Christian authors interpreted these thoughtsin their own way, but the form in which they connected the cultura dei with their notions of the‘highest genus’ has not been so very different from the form that their Greek predecessors hadintroduced.Finally, I wonder whether the arguments against the concept of religion can be used against theconcept of culture as well. In both cases we rely on notions and symbols that have been developedin the course of Western history and that have been used to designate subjects of scientific inves-tigations. At the same time we are challenged to do justice to the experiences, symbols and notionsof all other traditions. Again, it is important to distinguish the scientific discourse from the modesand manners in which people in the West and elsewhere realise their humanity. How we distin-guish cultures from one another and connect them to one another is a matter of the perspectiveswe use. Dubuisson offers the concept of cosmographic formations as a way of dealing with themeaning of cultural unity and differences. But why should not religion have a place in the enclo-sure of these formations?Cosmographic formationsIn order to bring the various features of humanity into perspective, Dubuisson introduces theconcept of cosmographic formations. The key to the meaning of this concept is the unfolding ofbeing human and cultural. We have to think of the various situations in which human beings findthemselves and try to make sense of their lifeethis is, how they relate to themselves variouslyS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178145under ever-changing conditions how they do or do not get their chances to become what they canbe. But the concept itself refers to the limits and fringes of the worlds which, by implication anddesign, are the result of the processes of unfolding. In cosmographic formations we come to thinkof reality as the all-inclusive horizon of all things, and we relate to it as if our vision of thingsbelonged to just one and the same common world. This process repeats itself in each humanbeing. But because it repeats itself differently in each of us, we realise that the common worldis actually a shared world which changes as different communities share different worlds. Thoughthe worlds which we form and occupy differ from individual to individual and from community tocommunity, they are also similar to one other. If we consider them in their comprehensiveness,they are ‘structurally and functionally homologous’ (p. 201).The dynamics of the world in which we live, and of which we become aware through the con-trasts we experience in the encounter with other people and other traditions, allows us to put our-selves in the ‘existential position’ of others; to follow them in what they ‘do in this world, how theyhave constructed it, and what they expect of it’; and to see that none of all the other worlds is sodifferent that it ‘is not THE world in the eyes of those who live there’ (p. 203). The relativism ofthis perspective is extreme, but it is extreme to the point that it relativises itself (see p. 201). ‘Inevery human project, we find the same paradox, for every creation presupposes that in its mostprimitive stage, it had already glimpsed the totality to come and had subsequently ceaselessly pur-sued the achievement of its realization at each stage of it’ (p. 202). Dubuisson cites Nicholas ofCusa (1401e64) for the idea that the universe appears as a point that enfolds everything,(p. 137) but he could have quoted him again in his outline of the meaning of cosmographicformations.The significance of the theory on cosmographic formations consists in the anthropological vi-sion that it provides and in the possibilities that it offers for the study of culture and cultures. Cos-mographic formations are key to the constitution of cultural phenomena. Without them, anadequate reconstruction of cultural realities is impossible. The question about them ‘has untilnow been neglected by scientific thought’ (p. 204). Since this theory is open and flexible enough‘to envisage the creation of an anthropology of transcendence that would study all forms ofthe beyond, all the categories of imaginary beings, all the messianic utopias, all the systems of cos-mic laws, all the ideal moralities intended to bear up the weight of living, such as humanity hasimagined them, it would be imprudent, and scientifically unsatisfying, to recognise in these onlythe exotic variations of an obscure religious instinct. The concept notion of cosmographic forma-tions has precisely the goal of subsuming this totality of human creations in a scientific projectthat does not itself presuppose specific orientations or values’ (p. 46).Inasmuch as cosmographic formations are a necessary feature of the worlds in which we live,they are not identical with religion. They indicate the limits of our worlds and are defined by themwith the same necessity in which they determine the space of meaning which is the signature ofthese worlds. But even if they are not identical with religion, we have still to answer the questionabout the processes that in each world lead to cosmographic formations and become structured asthey return from them into their own origins. Dubuisson gives a few hints of this problem when hewrites about the disincarnation of our bodies in texts and the incarnation of cosmography in ourbodies (p. 212). But he writes nothing about the centre of this mediation, which is no less impor-tant than the reversal of the extremes. This centre might be the ‘black hole’ that keeps humanworlds spinning (with all the ambiguities encapsulated in the word). If we intend to give146S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178a name to this centre, I do not see why we should not use the term religion. I think that it is at leastone of the associations that are contained in the use of this word.ConclusionIn this assessment of Dubuisson’s challenging book, only a few of the points that deserve to betreated comprehensively have been considered. His critique of the concept of religion is convinc-ing insofar as it reveals numerous distortions that undoubtedly have to be abandoned. But I dis-agree with him as to his overall assessment of this concept and its history. In contrast to his radical‘solution’, I argue for a critical revision of the concept of religion that includes his insights withoutexcluding the insights that have been gained in the brief history of religious studies and that maybe gained in the light of his theory of cosmographic formations. The reason for this ‘tenacity’ isnot ‘a superstitious fear that with the word [religion] might disappear the idea, too, that is, thevery thing that it claims to designate’ (p. 200) but the realisation that the dynamics of culturalreality are not thinkable without foci of mediation in each and in all worlds, and that it makessense to use the term, religion, as an indication of their centres of mediation. This understandingof religion needs to be elaborated. Since this is not possible now, it might help if we connect homocosmographicus with homo symbolicus, religiosus, historicus and many more epiteta that seem to beindispensable to a complete description of the nature of female and male human beings, and touse this connection to explore the possible meanings of religion.The Cosmographic Situation of PsychologyForrest L. VanceEmeritus, Department of Psychology, Valparaiso University, 1357 California Avenue West, St. Paul,MN 55108, USAE-mail address: forrest.vance@valpo.eduDaniel Dubuisson’s concept of cosmographic formations provides a perspective for under-standing the ideological entanglements of the human sciences. While most of these disciplineshave recognised their differences from the natural sciences, psychology has continued to maintainits claims to scientific objectivity in the face of compelling criticism of this self-image. In part, thisclaim is traceable to special features of the history and current structure of the discipline, but it isalso true that psychology, as science, offers a metaphysically sanitised alternative to religion in thecosmographic structure of Western culture. This alternative provides a welcome way for Westernculture to maintain its conception of human nature as normative, even if religion can no longerperform that cosmographic function.It is a beguiling idea to imagine that a comprehensive natural science of human behaviour andexperience is possible. The Enlightenment dream of reducing all human problems to matters ofcalculation remains alive in this enterprise. However, as Dubuisson notes, ‘Unlike the natural sci-ences, the various human sciences never have to deal with raw data. Today, outside of naive epis-temologies, we no longer think that there are ‘‘objective’’ facts on one side and their interpretationon the other’ (p. 175). Why psychology does not see its work in this way is something of a puzzle.S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178147I want to deploy Dubuisson’s concept of cosmographic formations to understand the peculiarepistemological situation of psychology among the human sciences and in relation to religion.Sigmund Koch, the most eminent historian of psychology, has concluded that psychology‘cannot be a coherent science’ and that many of its branches have more in common with thehumanities than with biology or the more exact sciences (see Koch, 1969). Later, in his 1979Presidential Address to the Divisions of General Psychology and of Philosophical Psychology,Koch said,Fields like sensory and biological psychology may certainly be regarded as solidly within thefamily of the biological and, in some reaches, natural sciences. But psychologists must finallyaccept the circumstance that extensive and important sectors of psychological study requiremodes of inquiry more like those of the humanities than the sciences. And among these Iwould include areas traditionally considered ‘fundamental’dlike perception, cognition, mo-tivation, and learningdas well as such more obviously rarefied fields as social psychology,psychopathology, personality, aesthetics, and the analysis of creativity. (Koch and Leary,1985, p. 94)Less diplomatically, Princeton’s Psychologist George Miller has declared: ‘I was educated to be-lieve that psychology is a biological science;. I discovered that psychology is an intellectualzoo.. Parts of psychology are clearly scientific, in the best sense of the term, and other partsare pure moonshine’ (Koch and Leary, 1985, pp. 40e1).The incoherence of the discipline has splintered university departments, spawned alternativeprofessional societies, and produced freestanding professional schools for practitioners, offeringthe Psy.D. (Doctor of Psychology) as a practice-oriented alternative degree to the traditionalPh.D. Still, most psychologists and psychology texts continue to describe the totality of psychol-ogy as a science, and many American universities count the completion of an introductory coursein psychology as work done in the natural sciences. In both its public image and its self-under-standing, psychology appears to enjoy a kind of immunity to criticisms of its illusory status asa natural science.This situation originates with the abrupt founding of academic psychology as an experimentalscience by the formal establishment of a psychological laboratory at Leipzig in 1879 by WilhelmWundt, a physician and physiologist with an appointment in philosophy. A few years earlier, Wil-liam James, also a physician and physiologist with an appointment in philosophy, had set upa small informal psychological demonstration laboratory at Harvard.6 In 1889 James was ap-pointed Professor of Psychology, apparently the first person anywhere with that title. Askedsome years later if he remembered the first lecture on psychology he had ever heard, James report-edly answered, ‘Yes, it was one I gave’.6 Freud, too, was a physician and physiologist, but psychoanalysis developed outside of academia and found its wayinto universities primarily through the humanities. Academic departments of psychology have most often treated thework of Freud and his followers as peripheral matters at best. Those departments have benefited from the enormouspublic interest in psychology generated by psychoanalysis, but its influence on them has been otherwise minimal.148S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178So academic psychology was blessed (or cursed) with undeniably scientific parents who wereeminent and productive scholars.7 It was a child of biology, but born and nurtured in the house-hold of philosophy, the tutelage of which it soon disclaimed. Granted precocious independent sta-tus both intellectually and administratively, ‘scientific’ psychology was freer than the other humansciences to set its own agenda and to be judge of its own success. And its early years were a timewhen scientific aspirations in any field were likely to be applauded.With few exceptions, the pioneers of the social and behavioural sciences in the late nineteenth andearly twentieth centuries were energiseddone might say intoxicateddby a vision of their work asobjective science. Science seemingly provided an escape from ideological influence, a way to findmeaning without resort to interpretive imagination. Stated baldly, it was widely believed that as fac-tual information accumulated, meaning emerged spontaneously as a natural byproduct. In 1910,Albert Hart’s Presidential Address to the American Historical Association includes the remarkthat, ‘History, too, has its inductive method, its relentless concentration of the grain in its narrowspout, till by its own weight it seeks the only outlet. In history, too, scattered and apparently unre-lated data fall together in harmonious wholes’ (Hart, quoted in Novick, 1988, p. 38).This was a time when seminars in philosophy and history were sometimes described as labora-tories, as were gymnasiums and kitchens, the passion for scientific methodology having becomeremarkably ecumenical.8 And for would-be scientists, there was a sense of eschatological urgency,since the time was thought to be fast approaching when all the important facts would be known:Finally, as American historians considered what it meant to be ‘scientists,’ they encounteredthe repeated suggestion that they were joining a finite venture, that science was approaching‘completeness’. When Max Planck chose science over classical philology or music in the1870’s, he did it against the advice of the professor of physics at the University of Munich,who warned him that there was nothing new to discover. Robert A. Millikan had the sameexperience at Columbia in the 1890’s. . At the dedication of the Ryerson Laboratory at theUniversity of Chicago in 1894, Albert A. Michelson thought it ‘probable that most of thegreat underlying principles have been firmly established’. He quoted approvingly the remarkof an eminent physicist, probably Lord Kelvin, that ‘the future truths of Physical Science areto be looked for in the sixth place of decimals’. (Novick, 1988, p. 37)Of course, latent reverberations of Christian apocalyptic expectations pervade Western dis-course. Frank Kermode developed the notion of ‘concord fictions’ to explicate the apocalyptic7 James’ publications add up to several thousand pages of print, but Wundt’s prodigious productivity totally eclipseshis. E.G. Boring calculated that Wundt ‘wrote about 53,735 pages in the sixty-eight years between 1853 and 1920 .Wundt wrote or revised at the average rate of 2.2 pages a day from 1853 to 1920, which comes to about one word everytwo minutes day and night, for the entire sixty-eight years’. Boring quotes James about Wundt and his critics, ‘Whilstthey make mincemeat of some of his views by their criticisms, he is meanwhile writing a book on an entirely differentsubject. Cut him up like a worm, and each fragment crawls; there is no noeud vital, in his mental medulla oblongata, sothat you can’t kill him all at once’ (Boring, 1950, pp. 345e6).8 The emergence of ‘domestic science’, later to become ‘home economics’ and ‘human ecology’ is one of the best ex-amples we have of genuine science really revolutionising a traditional activity. The founding mother of this movement,Ellen Swallow Richards, was a brilliant chemist and educator whose life and work are insufficiently celebrated. She wasMIT’s first female graduate and then a member of its faculty. A woman of many accomplishments, she is most widelyremembered for her book on homemaking (see Richards, 1882).S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178149structure implicit in western literature (see Kermode, 2000). This idea is far narrower than Du-buisson’s ‘cosmographic formations’, but it, too, exposes and relativises the assumptive worldof Western culture. The same might be said for Hayden White’s analysis of historical writingas narratives embodying various forms of ‘metahistory’ (see White, 1973). In the philosophy ofscience the ideas of Thomas Kuhn and Norwood Hanson reflect a similar viewpoint. Kuhn’s ‘par-adigm’ can be seen as a kind of cosmographic formation found in mature natural sciences (seeKuhn, 1962). Earlier Hanson had argued that there is an inevitable conflation of observationwith theory in all science (see Hanson, 1958). Something more like Dubuisson’s idea of cosmo-graphic formation is involved in the term meta-narrative, as used in Lyotard’s much discusseddefinition of postmodernism as ‘incredulity toward metanarratives’ (Lyotard, 1984, p. xxiv),and Wittgenstein’s concept of ‘a form of life’ is closer still:What Wittgenstein means by a ‘form of life’ is this: it is the underlying consensus of linguisticand non-linguistic behavior, assumptions, practices, traditions, and natural propensitieswhich humans, as social beings, share with one another, and which is therefore presupposedin the language they use;. The form of life is the frame of reference we learn to work withinwhen trained in the language of our community; learning that language is thus learning theoutlook, assumptions, and practices with which that language is inseparably bound and fromwhich its expressions get their meaning. (Grayling, 1988, p. 97)Dubuisson’s remark ‘that the last resort of all realist illusions is there, in this mutual, reciprocalcoincidence of words and things become a conflation of the world and discourse about the world’(p. 162) also resonates with Wittgenstein’s central concern about the distinction between ‘mate-rial’ and ‘grammatical’ propositions:The distinction between the two types of proposition lies at the heart of Wittgenstein’s entirephilosophy: in his thinking about psychology, mathematics, aesthetics and even religion, hiscentral criticism of those with whom he disagrees is that they have confused a grammaticalproposition with a material one, and have presented as a discovery something that shouldproperly be seen as a grammatical (in Wittgenstein’s rather odd sense of the word) innova-tion. (Monk, 1990, p. 468)These ideas all resonate with much older notions such as weltanschaung, zeitgeist and volkgeist,and with Vaihinger’s philosophy of ‘As If’ (see Vaihinger, 1925), which found its way into psy-chology in Alfred Adler’s fictional finalism (see Adler, 1927). For psychologists, an appreciationof Dubuisson’s thought would be facilitated if it could be articulated in relation to this alreadyfamiliar family of ideas, a task beyond the scope of this essay. However, making Dubuisson’sideas more approachable cannot soften the threatening nature of his conclusion: that our cosmo-graphic complicity is rooted in the profound need ‘we feel each time that we recall that we our-selves, our lives, and the meanings that we had assigned them until now could abandon us for everand be replaced by nothing’ (p. 213). That threat can only be evaded, as Dubuisson notes, by con-tinued cosmographic complicity.For psychologists, this evasion has generally meant defending the scientific pretensions of theirdiscipline. That this strategy, involves a conflation of the world with discourse about the world ishard to notice because that conflation is already present at the point of naming what is to bestudied. To take learning, intelligence, perception, motivation, cognition and emotion as scientific150S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178subject matter is to assume at the outset that these are objective characteristics of persons. Thisassumption yields fallacies of reification or hypostatisationdtreating interpretive abstractions asobjects. The appearance of objectivity is maintained by defining psychological concepts in termsof the procedures invented for measuring them. This method of ‘operational definition’ cameinto psychology in the 1930’s as a loan concept from Percy Bridgman’s analysis of scientificmethods in physics (see Bridgman, 1928). It is a useful but easily abused notion. For example, in-telligence can become defined as what intelligence tests measure, and the IQ (Intelligence Quotient)can be taken as an objective personal characteristic like height and weight. Though few psycholo-gists would any longer be so crude about this particular concept, it illustrates the general phenom-enon. When one looks at the tests of intelligence involved, it also shows the way operationism canfoster what Dubuisson describes as the ‘insidious confusion of science and ideology’ (p. 148).So psychology has been able to preserve the fact-interpretation distinction in its disciplinarycosmography by creating ‘facts’ to which it directs its attention and by misinterpreting those lin-guistic inventions as discoveries. Wittgenstein criticised Freud’s notion of the ‘unconscious’ as anexample of this process but also pointed out that such ‘grammatical innovations’ could be useful,as he believed Freud’s to be (see Monk, 1990, p. 468). In other words, concepts of the unconsciousmay be vindicated pragmatically even if incapable of being verified empirically. And psychology iscertainly a pragmatic success in contemporary Western society. What amounts to a cultural con-version to psychological mindedness was characterised by Philip Rieff in 1966 as ‘the triumph ofthe therapeutic’ (Rieff, 1966). The continuation of the religious core of Western ideology in thistransition is emphasised by the sub-title of Rieff’s book: ‘uses of faith after Freud’.One might, then, argue that, even if psychological concepts are constructions rather than dis-coveries, they are vindicated by their usefulness in ameliorating human problems. What easily es-capes notice in this line of thought is that it takes human beings to be varied approximations of anideal Western ‘homo psychologicus’ (see Rieff, 1959, ch. 10) a metaphysically sanitised version ofthe West’s ‘homo religiosus’, making psychology an effective, if unwitting, substitute for religionas the conceptual bastion of Western culture. As Dubuisson puts it, ‘The West is installed at theprow of the ship of moral and intellectual progress; all other cultures are behind it, at times veryfar behind. But, provided that they imitate it and absorb its lessons, a comparable if not identicalfortune will one day befall them’ (p. 153). Approached from the perspective of Dubuisson’s anal-ysis, psychology seems to be carrying out the cosmographic functions of religion under the dis-arming banner of science. The normative status of the western conception of human nature isseamlessly maintained.Despite the learned absent-mindedness of most psychologists, the ideological entanglements of thediscipline have been evident for some time to well-qualified observers in the discipline and to distin-guished colleagues in other fields. For example, Dorothea Braginsky, herself a psychologist, writes:The mainstream of American psychology is far from the objective science that it purports tobe. As a scientific enterprise, it is woven from the political, economic, and moral threads ofmainstream society. Rather than pursuing the value-free search for truth and understandingin order to help solve human problems, much of psychology is merely the handmaiden of thestatus quo and of society’s prevailing values. (Koch and Leary, 1985, p. 880)After remarking that psychology often provides ‘inappropriate solutions to misconstrued prob-lems’, she concludes thatS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178151If psychologists continue to encourage society to avoid confronting its real problems, thenmeaningful solutions and necessary reforms cannot occur. Finally, by serving as hand-maidens to the social order, psychologists degrade their profession and destroy all that ithas the potential to become. (Koch and Leary, 1985, p. 890)In The Servants of Power, a classic study of the origins of industrial psychology, historianLoren Baritz writes of Elton Mayo, a leading figure in the establishment of the field, that ‘‘Hisillusions of objectivity, lack of integrative theory, concern with what many have called the ‘wrongproblems’’, and, at least by implication, authoritarianism, virtually determined the types of errorshe committed. Such errors are built into modern social science’ (Baritz, 1960, p. 203).Richard Shweder, in his admirable effort to forge a ‘cultural psychology’, offers an anthropo-logist’s view of the situation of psychology:Ontologically speaking, knowledge in general psychology is the attempt to imagine andcharacterize the form or shape of an inherent central processing mechanism for psycholog-ical functions (discrimination, categorization, memory, learning, motivation, inference, andso on). Epistemologically speaking, knowledge seeking in general psychology is the attemptto get a look at the central processing mechanism untainted by content and context, andso on.. Unfortunately, even if the presumed inherent but hidden central processingmechanism does exist, the psychological laboratory is probably not the mythical enchanteddoorway through which we can step straight away into a more fundamental reality.. Theideas of a context-free environment, a meaning-free stimulus event, and a fixed meaning areprobably best kept where they belong, along with placeless space, eventless time, andsquared circles on that famous and fabulous list of impossible notions. (Shweder, 1991,pp. 80e1)Few psychologists will even notice these criticisms as long as the effective service of their dis-cipline as ‘handmaiden to the status quo’ continues to generate career opportunities. The remark-able success of the discipline in attracting recruits and now selling its services, minimises thepractical effects of thoughtful criticism. There are about 200,000 psychologists in the UnitedStates alone. More than 40% work as self-employed professionals. Popular psychological worksfill the shelves of bookstores, and professional publications continue to expand exponentially,with more than 40,000 articles per year now noted in Psychological Abstracts. A diminishing mi-nority of psychologists, probably fewer than 25%, hold university positions, and many of thosehave predominantly applied interests. The discipline is thus increasingly preoccupied with issuesof professionalisation.9By the end of the twentieth century, psychologists had succeeded in having licensing lawspassed throughout the United States and Canada. Thereby they achieved something uniqueamong the human sciences, though not for lack of trying by other disciplines, including history:Carl Russell Fish of the University of Wisconsin thought there were two possible ways todeal with the problem. One, which he thought impractical, was ‘the recognition of the9 In this and what follows, the situation in the North America is taken as paradigmatic, but a similar development isevident in much of Europe. The rise of professional psychology in Nazi Germany is a particularly interesting example ofprofessional opportunism and cultural complicity (see Geuter, 1993).152S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178historical profession as a definite discipline. such as the medical profession, and its recog-nition as such by the licensing of historians who can show proper training.’ His preferredsolution was a ‘statutory declaration that the truth (not opinion) in history is a public prop-erty and misstatements of the truth liable to grand jury indictment and prosecution by theproper authority’. (Novick, 1988, p. 194)Since Adam Smith’s analysis of guilds and corporations, it has become a commonplace thatprofessions are conspiracies against the public, or contrivances to extract excess profits. Thebest-known statement of this notion is George Bernard Shaw’s remark in the preface to hisplay The Doctor’s Dilemma (1906):The only evidence that can decide a case of malpractice is expert evidence: that is, the evi-dence of other doctors; and every doctor will allow a colleague to decimate a whole country-side sooner than violate the bond of professional etiquette by giving him away.. The effectof this state of things is to make the medical profession a conspiracy to hide its own short-comings. No doubt the same may be said of all professions. They are all conspiracies againstthe laity.It is a beauty of these ‘conspiracies’ that the perpetrators are generally taken in by theirown rhetoric. The view from within obscures the self-serving features of strategies of pro-fessionalisation such as licensing laws, accreditation of training programs and the establish-ment of ethical codes. The laity can be counted on to collude in this process by itsindifference to the self-regulating autonomy of professional guilds, barring outrageous inci-dents of misconduct.10In the light of these considerations, the contemporary rapprochement of psychology with reli-gion is a marriage of considerable convenience.11 The ambition of Western psychology to includeevery aspect of human behaviour and experience within its scope is coupled with the need ofreligion to maintain its relevance in an age of increasing skepticism and apostasy. The psychology10 Durkheim observes that ‘The distinctive feature of this kind of morals and what differentiates it from other branchesof ethics, is the sort of unconcern with which the public consciousness regards it. There are no moral rules whose in-fringement, in general at least, is looked on with so much indulgence by public opinion. The transgressions which haveonly to do with the practice of the profession, come in merely for a rather vague censure outside the strictly professionalfield. They count as venial.. They cannot be of deep concern to the common consciousness precisely because they arenot common to all members of the society and because, to put it in another way, they are rather outside the commonconsciousness. It is exactly because they govern functions not performed by everyone, that not everyone is able to havea sense of what these functions are, of what they ought to be, or of what special relations should exist between the in-dividuals concerned with applying them. All this escapes public opinion in a greater or lesser degree or is at least partlyoutside its immediate sphere of action’ (Durkheim, 1957, p. 6).11 The history of this detente is documented by Robert Emmons and Raymond Paloutzian (see Fiske et al., 2003, pp.377e402). The authors note that prior to 1982, current books on the psychology of religion were virtually non-existent.Now there are a dozen or more textbooks for this field, and chapters on psychology of religion are becoming common-place in introductory psychology textbooks. In 1976, what had been an informal association of psychologists interestedin religious issues became established as the American Psychological Association’s Division 36 (now under the rubricPsychology of Religion). This field was first deemed worthy of a review chapter in the Annual Review series in 1988.The 2003 article makes clear that the growth of the field will require increasingly frequent reviews. It also (p. 379) takesapproving notice of the idea that the human being is by nature homo religiosus. More on this topic can be found inCrystal Park’s, 2003 APA Division 36 Presidential Address (see Park, 2003).S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178153of religion serves the apologetic needs of theology by affirming the universality of religion and itscontribution to human flourishing and mental health. At the same time seminary education in-creasingly employs faculty trained in psychology to teach pastoral psychology and pastoral coun-seling, which produces clergy who work with people in ways that blur the distinction betweenpsychotherapy and spiritual direction.12This polite collaboration between religion and psychology is the diplomatic face of competingclaims to precedence as the central pillar of Western cosmography. For in spite of their attemptsto achieve symbiosis, and their shared ethnocentrism, homo religiosus and homo psychologicus rep-resent substantially different conceptions of human nature. Unfortunately, no alternative cosmo-graphically powerful and inclusive view of human nature is as yet in play.But even if psychology has not yet replaced religion as the central cosmographic formationof Western culture, it is making discernable progress. Ironically, religion is providing aid andcomfort to its potential cultural successor. Yet it may be that religion is beginning to heedthose of its thoughtful advocates who decry its collusion in culturalimperialism and urgea much more modest agenda.13 Until psychology joins the other human sciences in givingup objectivist fantasies, it will continue to provide support and comfort to the status quoin the name of science. The fruitfulness of Dubuisson’s ideas in the explication of this issueshould be obvious.12 There are currently more than 3000 members of the American Association of Pastoral Counselors (AAPC), whichoperates a certification program for practitioners It also accredits pastoral counseling centers and approves trainingprograms. AAPC describes pastoral counseling as ‘a unique form of psychotherapy which uses spiritual resources aswell as psychological understanding for healing and growth’. The Association for Clinical Pastoral Education(ACPE) certifies seminary faculty members to be CPE Supervisors, accredits CPE Centers, and forms partnershipswith Theological schools and religious organizations to promote its activities.13 Ludwig Feuerbach must be reckoned the most influential agent provocateur for a humanistic interpretation of re-ligion. In his powerful critique, anthropology replaces theology, and metaphysics is swallowed up by ethics and politics.In 1841 Feuerbach wrote that ‘there is no other essence which man can think, dream of, imagine, feel, believe in, wishfor, love and adore as the absolute, than the essence of human nature itself’ (Feuerbach, 1989, p. 270). In his 1851Lectures on the Essence of Religion Feuerbach writes that his purpose was, ‘to demonstrate that the being whichman, in religion and theology, sets up as a distinct being over and against himself, is his own essence. It was my purposeto demonstrate this so that man, who is always unconsciously governed and determined by his own essence alone, mayin future consciously take his own human essence as the law and determining ground, the aim and measure, of his eth-ical and political life’. And ‘The purpose of my lectures as of my books is to transform theologians into anthropologists,lovers of God into lovers of man, candidates for the next world into students of this world, religious and political flun-keys of heavenly and earthly monarchs into free, self-reliant citizens of earth’ (Feuerbach, 1967, pp. 22e3). On the con-temporary scene, Episcopal Bishop John Spong is particularly visible (see Spong, 1988, 2001). His works spell outa non-theistic, historically and culturally relativised vision for the church. In this, he follows his mentor and friend, An-glican Bishop John A.T. Robinson, who achieved notoriety by making much the same case in his Honest to God (1963).Both Robinson and Spong appeal for support to Dietrich Bonhoeffer, whose martyrdom may save Bonhoeffe, sadlytruncated movement towards a Christianity without religion from the anathemas pronounced against some of his ad-mirers’ ideas. Most internal critics of religion have laboured in relative obscurity within the academic world of historicaland textual criticism. Those who seek to apply the insights of scholarship to ecclesial reform cannot expect to lead quietlives.154S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178The resiliency of conceptual anachronisms: on knowing thelimits of ‘the West’ and ‘religion’Russell T. McCutcheonDepartment of Religious Studies, University of Alabama, 212 Manly Hall, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0264, USAE-mail address: russell.mccutcheon@ua.edu‘We are bound to employ novel terms to denote novel ideas’. (Cicero, De Natura Deorum)In the second chapter of Anthony Grafton’s Bring Out Your Dead (2001), we learn of the caseof Lorenzo Valla (1407e1457), the Italian humanist now remembered for his early enthusiasm forusing the comparative and historical methods when studying documents from antiquity. Accord-ing to Grafton, in studying the historicity of the Donation of Constantineda legal text, in use sincethe Middle Ages, which was once believed to date from the fourth century, documentingConstantine’s transfer of the governance of Italy and the Western Roman provinces to PopeSylvester I (d. 335), in appreciation for his having been cured of his leprosydValla quotedlavishly from texts of several kinds, and proved that the document represented the Romansas using words that had not yet been coined to describe institutions that they would not haverecognised. A text that contained these anachronisms could hardly have been written at thepurported time of its origin. Valla’s demonstration threatened not only cherished beliefs butthe political and economic powers of the popes. (Grafton, 2001, p. 52).With typical irony, Grafton concludes his story of Valla by noting that ‘[s]ince he could not beconvinced of his error, he was offered a good job in Rome.’ In the words of Michael Corleone,recalling one of the lessons his father taught him, ‘Keep your friends close, but your enemiescloser’ (‘The Godfather’, Part II [1974]).14Given the manner in which the Donation functioned as part of a system thatduntil scholars suchas Valla got their hands on it, that isdlegitimised papal control by seamlessly linking the presentwith what was then seen to be an authoritative past, it is understandable that the historicisationof such documentsdthat is, identifying the gaps between present and pastddoes not normallywin scholars friends in high places. For example, consider that in its article on Valla, the entry inthe New Catholic Encyclopedia informs its readers that Valla was arrogant and quarrelsome(Montano, 2002, p. 377). In its very brief article on Valla, the Dictionnaire de The´ologie Catholiqueconcludes that although Valla certainly wrote a lot, he leaves behind a deplorable, or at leasta regrettable, reputation (‘une faˆ cheuse re´ putation’) (Vacant, et al., 1908e1950, vol. 15, p. 2526).To be fair, these minimalisations are no more significant than the popular Christian History14 Of course this line is believed to come from Sun Tzu: ‘When we are near, we must make the enemy believe we are faraway; when far away, we must make him believe we are near’. It should be noted that Valla was tried for heresy by theCuria at Naples, a trial cut short by King Alfonso’s intervention. That Alfonso, King of Aragon, Sicily, and Naples,was intent on extending his control over what were then papal lands, should not go unnoticed when trying to under-stand his interest in Valla’s case, whose study of the Donation was written under Alfonso’s protection. However, Vallaeventually wrote Apologia ad Eugenio IV, in which he asked to be excused for his shortcomings, and under Pope Nich-olas V was appointed as scriptor, and ended his days as the Canon of St John Lateran (the Pope’s own church).S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178155magazine’s sensationalist portrait of Valla in Christian History magazine as a proto-Reformer andhero who uncovered ‘Church history’s biggest hoax’ by means of his quest for the ‘authenticity’ ofhistorical documents (Prosser, 2001, p. 35).The case of Valla, along with both the jabs at his character and praise concerning his role in blow-ing the lid off of the so-called Catholic hoax, nicely sets the table for current efforts to historicise theprimary taxon of our field, the classification ‘religion’ itselfdwhat I shall refer to as a ‘resilient con-ceptual anachronism’, adapting a phrase from H.A. Drake’s impressive study of Constantine (seeDrake, 2000, p. 17).15 In the case of Valla we have an early modern episode in the clash between sys-tems of authority, or what others might simply call ‘regimes of truth’ (see Lincoln, 1996, p. 227,Thesis 13), a clash that had something to do with contesting not only the perceived continuitiesbetween the present and the past, the local and the universal, but also the perceived continuitiesbetween the presumed inner essence of persons, texts and institutions on the one hand and theirmaterial worth, social status and thus continued legitimacy on the other. Moreover, the tale ofValla’s attempt to contest the Rome of his day, by tackling the historicity and thus the authorityof one of its central legal texts, only to end up acting as the Canon of the Pope’s own church, pro-vides a sobering example of what can happen when one tries to pull the rug out from under somecherished assumptions. For all too predictably, perhaps, ‘[e]ven those who set out with the mosthonorable of intentions,’ concludes Grafton, ‘could easily take wrong turnings in this rebarbativeintellectual country’ (Grafton, 2001, p. 53).Although Grafton is writing about fifteenth-century Italy, he might have been writing aboutcontemporary scholarship as well. For despite the critiques of a number of scholarsdand DanielDubuisson’s recently translated The Western Construction of Religion is one of the most thorough-d‘religion’ has proved itself to be an example of one of those surprisingly resilient holdovers froma previous era. (‘World religions’ is one as well (see Masuzawa, 2005). Its resiliency, Dubuissonargues, is linked to the fact that, like ‘meaning’ and ‘intention’, it is a signifier that is believedby its users to refer not to anything in the observable world of mere appearances but instead eitherto unseen beings or to inner feelings, both of which are thought to exist wholly apart from thecausality of the contingent world of mundane human existence. By definition, then, religiondboth the signifier and that which it apparently signifiesddefies definition. Yet it is precisely inthis defiance that its legitimacy is supposedly found, insomuch as one’s inability to define it some-how validates the presumption that the term refers to some stable yet unseen world, either withinthe human heart or somewhere out there in the great beyond. Although it is hardly news to manyscholars that all signifiers are empty, arbitrary signs that derive meaning from their circulationwithin a series of relationships with other equally empty signifiers, this playfulness of meaning-making apparently stops at the door of ‘religion.’Dubuisson therefore rightly characterises religion as an ‘empty core’ (p. 68) that is said to be in-step with an ever-changing reality. It therefore serves as a pretty handy rhetorical device to have inone’s toolbox (whatever the toolbox), for it allows one to weather the kinds of storms regularly15 Drake uses this phrase to characterise the manner in which modern scholars of Constantine seem incapable of dis-tinguishing their own viewpoint from that of people in ancient times, such as Jacob Burckhardt who, in writing his in-fluential Die Zeit Konstantins des Grossen (published in 1853, and translated as The Age of Constantine the Great),assumed that ‘the disdain for established institutions which he [Burckhardt] saw all around him prevailed in the fourthcentury as well’ (Drake, 2000, p. 17).156S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178thrown at us by historydfor example, those inconvenient historical gaps that go by the names ofchance, accident, forgetfulness and ambiguity. Consider a 2004 conference that I attended on to‘Conflicts at the Border of Religions and the Secular,’16 at which I drew attention to the manner inwhich writersddespite acknowledging that the term ‘religion’ has a specific yet sadly vague ety-mologydnonetheless assert that all human beings are religious.17 This is none other than an in-stance of having one’s cake and eating it too, for the influence of history is acknowledged amidstholding onto a transcendent element that successfully rides the unpredictable waves of historicalhappenstance. Although the names change, Led Zeppelin was right: the song remains the same(see McCutcheon, 2005a). In the animated conversation that followed, a scholar asserted thatthe Arabic term d(cid:2)ın ‘means religion’dnot just today, not just for contemporary, trans-nationalArabic-language users thoroughly acquainted with the Euro-North American semantic worldof ‘religion,’ but everywhere and always. Despite the fact that even for ancient Romans religiodid not mean ‘religion’ as we have come to use it today, this scholar linked the term to its sup-posed subject much the same as the traditional essence/manifestation distinction was once wieldedby phenomenologists, relying on the connector ‘means’ (as in ‘d(cid:2)ın means religion’) to be doingsome pretty heavy metaphysical lifting.18Despite this asserted correspondence between word and whomever, a rather different story istold by more historically nuanced studies such as Dubuisson’s, suggesting that what is at stakein this debate are, as in Valla’s day, different philosophies of history and thus systems of au-thority.19 Case in point, consider the Encyclopedia of Islam’s persuasive case for understandingd(cid:2)ın to have developed from the notion of a debt that must be settled on a specific date, which inturn leads to such successive usages as: the idea of properly following an established custom ofsettling debts; the act of guiding one in a prescribed direction; the act of judging whether sucha prescription has in fact been followed; and visiting retribution upon whomever has failed tofollow the required path (see Lewis et al., 1965, pp. 293e6). As such, yawm al-d(cid:2)ın, or what wemight translate as ‘Day of Judgment’, therefore comes to signify the day when Allah gives di-rection to all human beings. Much as with the relation between the geographic and prescriptivesenses of such English words as ‘direction’ and ‘directive’, we see here a gradual mingling ofsocial exchange with geographic movement and, eventually, with rules of propriety. Accord-ingly, d(cid:2)ın eventually moves from the more narrow sense of a debt to be discharged to a termthat stands in for ‘the body of obligatory prescriptions to which one must submit’ (Lewiset al., 1965, p. 293).Therefore it is rather misleading to suggest, as does one reference which agrees with the col-league cited, that d(cid:2)ın is ‘employed to mean a religion together with its practices in general’ (Glasse´ ,16 The one-day conference, held on 23 April 2004, was sponsored by the Center for the Study of Religion and Conflict,Arizona State University. My thanks to Linell Cady for the kind invitation to speak and to Carolyn Forbes for makingthe arrangements.17 For a recent example of this, see the textbook by Esposito et al., 2002, p. 50. The text appears unchanged in the 2006edition. For a critique, see McCutcheon, 2005, pp. 40e1.18 Anyone who studied literature in high school, and who has since come to see the study of meaning and intentionalityas a rather thorny problem, is more than familiar with the ahistorical work being done by this kind of meaning-talk, asin the proverbial question: ‘What did Shakespeare mean by.?’19 The following analysis of d(cid:2)ın derives from McCutcheon, 2005b, ch. 3.S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e1781571989, p. 99). Although italicising this intimation of intentionality may put too fine an edge on theissue, d(cid:2)ın is not ‘employed to mean a religion’ or even some sense of worship or religiositydas ifearly Arabic writers were hunting for a local equivalent for what some of us now take to be theobviously universal concept that lurks deep within the word ‘religion’. Instead, as Dubuissonwould observe, an ancient Arabic term is translated by contemporary English speakers intenton finding a universal phenomenon to confirm their particular way of organising the world.If this etymology is persuasive, then there is much lost in the translation, for ‘the concept in-dicated by d(cid:2)ın does not exactly coincide with the ordinary concept of ‘religion’ precisely becauseof the semantic conception of the word’ (Lewis et al., 1965, p. 293). Just what is lost is significant.For instance, consider a recent translation of the Qur’an’s famous sur(cid:2)a 5.3:Today I have perfected your system of beliefand bestowed My favours upon you in full,and have chosen submission (al-Islam) as the creed for you. (Ali, 1988, p. 98)Or as phrased in a popular translation of the Qur’an:The day I have perfected your religion for you and completed My favour to you. I have chosenIslam to be your faith. (Dawood, 1983, p. 387)As Dubuisson might have predicted, both ‘system of belief’ and ‘creed’ in the first instance, and‘religion’ and ‘faith’ in the second, are English renderings of d(cid:2)ındtranslations that nicely lock theArabic term within a discourse on inner sentiment and individual choice concerning a series ofsystematically related propositionsdthat is, a creed that expresses a deep faith with which oneeither does or does not agree. Nothing could be further from the complex social, transactionalhistory of the ancient Arabic concept.Although ‘[t]hese few remarks. perhaps oversimplify the difficulties encountered in translatingthe d(cid:2)ın of Kur’anic [sic] verses into Western languages’ (Lewis et al., 1965, p. 293e4), we see thata concept that once marked one’s changeable status within an historical world of differing ranksand of competing interests and entitlements has come to be sentimentalised as a matter of innerfaith, belief, opinion and judgment, all of which are what we today commonly mean by ‘religion’.The history of d(cid:2)ın could therefore be the topic of a chapter in what we might call the modernistsentimentalisation of classical piety (for example, see Smith, 1998, p. 271). But this book canonly be written by one who, along with writers such as Dubuisson, presumes that both wordsand concepts, both essences and manifestations, are all malleable historical products that changeover time and place, in light of differing interests and preferences. This is clearly not the presump-tion of those historians of religion whom Dubuisson rightly, especially, in the first three chapters ofhis book: those who seek ‘to preserve an essential (timeless?) tie between the current, living accep-tance of a word and its hypothetical first reception, raised to the status of original, founding datum’(p. 22). For these scholars, ‘religion’, like the unsinkable Molly Brown, is a wonderfully resilientsignifier that bounces back no matter what one throws at it. Yet like the wishful tale of MollyBrown taking charge of the Titanic’s famed life boat number six, ‘religion’ as we have it todaymay be nothing more or less than a product of the Victorian imagination.It is just this presumption of universal significationdwhat Dubuisson calls the ‘learned confu-sion between etymological signification and essences’ (p. 22) as well as ‘the old Platonic nostalgia’(p. 23)dthat Dubuisson subjects to repeated and hard-hitting critique. Although ‘religion’ came158S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178to prominence in modernity, during which time it came to be used to name an inner dispositionrather than an outer social status, Dubuisson is particularly interested in that set of preconditions,which he traces to early Christianity, that helped to set the stage for the modern rise of ‘religion’.Using the writings of Paul as an early example, Dubuisson draws attention to the utility of ‘thecircumcision of the heart’ rhetoric (Romans 2:29). This handy devise helps us out with the peskyfact that the empirical thing we call the letter of the law sometimes (well, let’s be honest and justfurthering our context-is incapable of matching, and therefore,say most ofspecific, practical interests; it’s therefore pretty tempting to think up a spirit of the law (call itthe law’s essence, its intention, or meaning, etc.).20 This crafty piece of metaphysics nicely enablesus to sidestep a basic tenet of historically based scholarship: that our rules, curiosities and toolsare just thatdours; neither are we to expect them to be everyone else’s nor are we to assume thatthey will always be ours.the time)It is the mark of a certain kind of hubris when one fails to see that the utility of one’s toolsdone’sconceptual categoriesdis linked to one’s questions and interests and not to their ability to fit realityin a seamless manner. With this hubris in minddone that often attends our use of such signifiers as‘religion’ and ‘human nature’dI cannot help but recall Clint Eastwood’s second ‘Dirty Harry’ film,‘Magnum Force’ (1973), in which his corrupt superior, Lieutenant Briggs (played by Hal Hol-brook), drives away from the crime scene at the film’s end, in Harry’s car, prepared to indict Harryfor his own crimes. Unbeknownst to Briggs, of course, the bomb intended for Harry was still in thecar and, in Eastwood’s typically detached style, Harry passively watches his Lieutenant’s car blowup as it drives away. ‘A man’s got to know his limitations’, Harry says dryly. Those who make theircategories do far too much work fail to recognise the limitations of their tools.Of course there are those like Dubuisson, who think that ‘religion’ can do no heavy liftingwhatsoever and recommend that we throw it out altogether when doing anything but description.For these writers, there is likely no ‘sound principle of economy’ that, as Dubuisson suggests, ‘ob-liges us to use it [i.e., religion]’ (p. 102). Although the work of Tim Fitzgerald (2000, 2003a) cer-tainly comes to mind as one of the better-known recent criticisms of ‘religion’, the work of RonaldInden provides another example, one worth considering here because it may not be so familiar togeneral theorists as that of Fitzgerald.21In an understatement worthy of Grafton, Inden, the author of the recently reissued ImaginingIndia (2001), comments in a footnote to the introduction to his co-written book, Querying theMedieval, that the ‘various ideas of religion that scholars have used have a complicated andcontested history, which we will bypass here’ (Inden, 2000, p. 22 n. 50). This bypass consists ofdropping the term completely and replacing it with ‘way of life’. ‘Ritual’ goes out the door aswell, being replaced by ‘life-transforming practices’. ‘Disciplinary order’ replaces such notionsas ‘school’ and ‘sect’; and as for such favourites as ‘myth,’ ‘ideology’ and the much coveted ‘world20 See Arnal (in press) for a novel argument that draws on Pierre Bourdieu’s work on doxa to argue that, contrary topopular scholarly conceptions, Paul was not a critic of the Judaism of his day but was instead intent on making whatArnal terms ‘artificial Jews’dthat is, in disengaging the preferential status of turn-of-the-era Jews from any biologicalor ethnic sense and instead redeploying this identity as an immaterial, or ‘spiritual’, identity, thereby extending thissocial identity, and the privileges that come with it, to a new group.21 For an example of how heated these debates can get, readers should to see Fitzgerald’s recent exchange with IanReader (see Fitzgerald, 2003b, 2004; Reader, 2004).S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178159view,’ they all get replaced by such terms as ‘life-wish’, ‘royal wish’, ‘imperial wish’, ‘world wish’,‘life-account’, ‘world account’ and ‘world vision’ (pp. 22e3)dall in an effort to indicate the oftenoverlooked social sites and effects of these systems.Although writers long accustomed to finding only ‘religion’ to have scholarly merit will likelysee such terminological revisions to embody a ‘barbarism of remarkable infelicity’ (as Strenski[1998, p. 124] once described my own suggestion [McCutcheon, 2001, ch. 2] of redescribing ‘reli-gion’ as ‘social formation’22), those who are suspicious of the manner in which ‘religion’ is usedwithin social systems in which doctrine is presumed to take priority over social practice, beliefover behaviour, private experience over public behaviour and authoritative tradition over the con-tingent present, will more than likely welcome the attempt to introduce a greater degree of theoryinto our technical terminology, as is evident in Dubuisson’s preferred redescription: ‘cosmo-graphic formation’ (pp. 17, 69, 199ff.). But bringing social theory to bear on the texts, behavioursand self-reports of so-called religious people irritates quite a few of our peersdan irritation thatstymies the creation of new knowledge, for the application of theories that are separate from thedata inevitably leads to a systematic renaming of that which participants take for granted. As Cic-ero had his Epicurean philosopher, Velleius, tell his readers, ‘We are bound to employ novel termsto denote novel ideas, just as Epicirus himself employed the word prolepsis in a sense in which noone had ever used it before’. Accordingly, criticism of new words is simply criticism of new ideasand their new institutions by other means.Dubuisson’s new technical term is connected to the idea that, instead of presuming ‘an objec-tively constant thing, a ‘‘religion’’’ (as phrased by Inden [2000, p. 23]), we ought to take seriouslythat the study of human practices must consider the complex world of intention and structure, ofagency and accident, where textual and doctrinal artifacts are tips of competitive social econo-mies, each concocting a habitable semantic world. With this presumption in mind, Dubuisson’swork has much in common with that of Inden. Consider how Inden’s ‘disciplinary order’dmuchlike cosmographic formationdmakes eminent sense if we problematise the manner in which‘school’ presumes a static homogeneity and uniform opinion. Instead, ‘disciplinary order’ drawsattention to the many techniques that are up and running when any social world is perceived by itsparticipants, or by scholars, as a consensual arrangement that endures over time. In the words ofone of Inden’s reviewers, the things many of us call religions are therefore ‘significant competingarticulations of knowledge about the world and proper action in it, with the power to fashion andorder the lives of those who accept them’ (Davis, 2002, p. 1410). This definition is a useful one forDubuisson’s notion of cosmographic formation.The advantage of this theory-based approach, in the words of Davis once again, is that it ‘rep-resents a significant and challenging revision’ to indigenous self-reports, in as much as it placesthose groups who are self-described religious elites ‘in their broader sphere of action [i.e., socialworld] and envision[s] them as seriously engaged in projects of constructing polities’ (Davis,2002, p. 1410). It was just such a revision that got Valla into trouble back in fifteenth-centuryItaly! If we are willing to risk a little bit of trouble today, then we will see that there’s nothingparticularly religious about so-called religious elites, for they, like the rest of us are working within22 For a reply to some of Strenski’s recent critiques of scholarship on ‘religion’, see McCutcheon 2004.160S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178a competitive context and drawing on useful discursive conventions to fashion a socially habitableworld that accords with their interests and expectations.Swimming against the anti-historicist presumption that at the root of a text there lies some co-herent and uniform meaningda presumption that fueled the development of textual criticism andphilosophy alikedInden is equally suspicious of alternate approaches that emphasise context,such as class and gender, as the non-agential setting that determines what gets to count as mean-ingful. Instead, he attempts to steer a middle course between text and context, between agency andstructure:If we give up the notion of a universal truth grounded either in theology or scientific knowl-edge, if we no longer think of the state of affairs in the world as God’s plan or nature’s de-sign, then the object of our inquiry shifts. We no longer concern ourselves with trying toknow God or one of his reborn substitutesdhuman nature, reason, creative genius, modesof production, and the likedbut turn to the causes of the human world; transitory humanagents and their actions. Of special importance are the practices, persistent and consciouslyordered activities, in which people engage because these, more than other activities, have todo with ordering the world and disrupting orders. (Inden, 2000, p. 4)To those who welcome the appearance of Foucault in the department of religious studies, thisall makes great sense. To those intent on doing God’s work or finding either the religion geneor the religious genius, these are dangerous words, for they throw the baby out with the bathwater.Keeping in mind Inden’s criticism of the kind of agency that haunts much work in our field, Irealise that, despite my support for Dubuisson’s effort to start emptying this murky tub, I donot think that we have yet arrived at the point of putting forward a fully redescribed approachto the study of human behavior bereft of that pesky little conceptual anachronism from whichthis very journal gains its name and identity.23 If all we are interested in is description, and de-scriptions of the self-reports of just those people who use a specific linguistic device to classifyfeatures of their lives, then by all means let’s keep ‘religion’. But our failure to elevate otherindigenous concepts to the level of theory d people around the globe use a lot of local conceptsto organise their lives, so where is the journal entitled Mana, D(cid:2)ın, or Bhakti?24 d suggests thatthose who are interested in doing something more than repeat self-reports that regularly distin-guish religion from politics, for example, will have to go looking for other conceptual helpers tomake sense of such talk. But the advantage of the helper Dubuisson offersdcosmographic for-mationdis not, as he argues, that it is ‘freed from all religious concern and all Western preju-dice’ (p. 69). If, for the moment, I can be granted the right to talk about such an unwieldy thing23 Note that this journal’s redesigned cover, which presents a collection of what are presumably words in many lan-guages for ‘religion’, provides surprisingly useful grist for Dubuisson’s critical mill.24 Despite the late Ninian Smart’s recommendation that we internationalise the field by using concepts such as bhakti,li, m(cid:2)arga, and shar(cid:2)ı ’ah in our scholarly studies (see Smart, 1994, pp. 902e3; McCutcheon, 1997, pp. 148e9), as Du-buisson notes, we would likely feel odd having other scholars arrive on our shores searching for the dharmic natureto our social institutions, informing us that, whether or not we knew it, we all had dharmic experiences. As he observes,‘India has never been tempted or never been able to impose its concept of dharma on anthropological thought as anabsolute system of reference. Nor did it ever claim that there was a universal essence of dharma present in all cultures,that every person carried within him or her a homo dharmicus’ (p. 101).S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178161as ‘the West’, it occurs to me that the level of material affluence necessary to be able to sit backand discuss the systems that humans devise to classify and negotiate their worlds is somethingthat only exists in certain historical periods and specific contemporary national regions. In otherwords, the very distinction between ‘participation in’ and ‘study of’da distinction that formsthe basis of our fielddis itself evidence of a particular social world. Call it ‘the West’, if youlike, but more accurately, it might be specified in terms of the economic privilege requiredfor developing the appearance of intellectual distance and emotional detachment necessaryfor these scholarly pursuits.Although I certainly prefer his theory-based term to ‘religion’, his preference for ‘cosmographicformation’ is therefore not based on the fact that it is either freed of Western prejudice or moreintelligible. Instead, the term has utility for those of us working in the human sciences because itsintelligibility is based on a social theory concerning the variety of ways in which people go aboutestablishing and contesting their systems of habitability (recalling Inden as well as the work ofWilliam Paden [2000]). Although ‘religion’, along with its many uses, is certainly intelligible tovast numbers of people, it is precisely this intelligibilitydthe common, taken-for-grantedness ofintertwined discourses (what Dubuisson likens to a hypertext [p. 32]) on invisible beings, morality,endtimes, origins, ritual specialists, textualisation, experience and the supposedly distinct natureof the institutions in which these discourses routinely circulatedthat ought to occupy the atten-tion of scholars. Just how is it that this grouping appears to so many person as intelligible? If thesethings, taken together, count as religion, then the problem of why it is that just these things are socommonly grouped together by certain societies, in clear distinction from other parts of their so-cial worlds, will be answered only by a theory from outside the discourse on religion. Because re-ligion cannot levitate itself, concepts such as cosmographic formation, relying on the muscleprovided by a social theory that is interested in all instances of worldmaking activity, thereforesteps in to do some of the work.The point is that scholarly terms are not more intelligible than folk concepts. Despite my owndifficulties with the rhetorics of good and evil that populate post 11 September 2001 internationalrelations, I do not fail to recognise that these rhetorics are extremely useful for large numbers ofpersons who are trying to make sense of their worlds and who, in so doing, create worlds that areconducive to their interests. Instead, the advantage for scholars of using concepts such as cosmo-graphic formation is that their tools are placed within a discourse other than the one that is understudy, ensuring that the interests advanced by our work are ours and not those of the people westudy.Still, I admit to a nagging hunch that, despite replacing ‘religion’, the old philosophical idealismyet seeps back in to many of our efforts to rethink our field. For instance, The Western Constructionof Religion is an intellectual history in which actual human beings do not appear all that often. It isa critique of ideas, of paradigms and of ‘intellectual hegemony’ (p. 94). It is not a book about eco-nomics and material interests. Examining ‘cosmographical schemas deeply buried in our ways ofthinking’ (p. 94) therefore seems strangely reminiscent of the one-time emphasis on studying beliefs,ideas and doctrines, or on studying such observable things as behaviours and texts as if they were themerely outward expressions of inner sentiments, intentions or mentalities. But it is this kind of schol-arship that Dubuisson criticises so well in the first half of the book. Had he prioritised the study of thestructures and institutions that make ideas possible, rather than the study of ideas that animate in-stitutions, had his critique of ‘religion’ not been premised on the historic influence of specifically162S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178Christian thinkers,25 perhaps he would have arrived at different conclusions. Instead of concludingthat ‘the West’ ‘espouse[s a] bad epistemology . that in the last analysis simply does not work’ (pp.94e5), he might have seen that our continued success at thinking this thing that so many of us knowas ‘the West’, or the ease with which we today look back on two millennia and pick out the specifically‘early Christian’ writers from among a host of other people in antiquity, is all evidence of the successof the institutions represented by this epistemology. If, along with Dubuisson, we say that the Westcreated religion and that ‘the concept of religion eventually came to be the core of the Western world-view’ (p. 94), then we might have to conclude that it works extremely well, for it is only by using ‘theWest’ that a book such as this can be written, so central to its thesis is a posited direct link betweena turn-of-the-era Mediterranean textdthe letters of Pauldand current European and North Amer-ican scholarship. Therefore Dubuisson’s critique of the manner in which ‘the West continuouslyspeaks of itself to itself, even when it speaks of others’ might, ironically, be but one more piece ofevidence concerning just how well these mechanisms continue to work. To phrase it another way,it may not stem from ‘intellectual laziness’ (pp. 102, 107) or even from the inevitable inertia that at-tends all social existence.26 Instead, it may be because these anachronisms work so well in helpinga host of agents to address the inevitable gaps of historical existence, thereby furthering their variousinterests. Laziness may be better redescribed as an efficacious social strategy.As well, I admit to having some ambivalence towards Dubuisson’s critique of idealist no-tions of subjectivity (see pp. 107e12). For despite my enthusiasm for the manner in whichhe argues that the increasing preoccupation of modernity with ‘the torments of the interiorlife’ (p. 107), as evidenced by the rise of discourses on faith and experience, can be linkedto the rise and dominance of mass movements (see Perkins, 1995), I am left slightly unsatisfiedwith the thoroughness of this critique. Case in point: although it may seem a quibble, considerDubuisson’s use of Saint Paul.27 Concerning the Stoic ideal of a universal civilisation, we read:‘Here one cannot but recall Saint Paul’s bold, inspired decision to turn away from the Jewishworld (which he saw as too sectarian and ungrateful) evangelise the heathen, and finally, go toRome, the heart of the pagan empire’ (p. 103). Citing Acts 13:46e49, which details the divinemandate for Paul to establish a mission to the Gentiles, Dubuisson elaborates on what he de-scribes as ‘Saint Paul’s choice’: ‘Without doubt this decision, which inaugurated what in itsfurther propagation would be transformed into a veritable world conquest, must be seen asone of the founding acts of the West, one of those of which we can say with certainty thatit influenced the fate of humanity’ (p. 103).25 That is, there is the nagging problem of writers who throw out ‘religion’ but end up studying Christians, Muslims,Hindus, etc.din a word, the things we already seem to know to be religions.26 As my colleague Tim Murphy once phrased it, plain old inertia might explain more than we realise. The prominenceof ‘world religions’ as a concept, despite some devastating recent critiques, provides one possible example. Attendingthe American Academy of Religion’s 2006 Southeastern Commission on the Study of Religion’s regional meeting inAtlanta (March 10e12), it was as if no one had ever offered a critique of ‘religion’.27 As an aside, let me say that I am curious as to why Paul is always referred to by Dubuisson as ‘Saint Paul’, for to mymind the theological honorific common in French discourse places this figure within a specific settingdone that Du-buisson works to historicise throughout the book. Unless, of course, his intention is merely to refer to this figure ina descriptively accurate manner, at least as particular contemporary Christian insiders might. However, if this werethe case, then would he also follow any reference to Mohammad with ‘peace be on him’?S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178163My difficulty with this passage concerns the manner in which social change is presumed uni-formly to develop from the choices of individual social actorsdchoices seamlessly communicatedto us by means of texts that later generations of readers can employ to understand the intentionsof their predecessors. This view of social changedwhat we once might have termed a great manview of historydseems at odds with much of Dubuisson’s own critique. In fact, a view of historymore in keeping with his useful analysis of representationdone in which we presume from theoutset that ‘the world is mute about itself’ (p. 127)dwould find the signifier ‘Saint Paul,’ alongwith such things as ‘the Book of Acts’ and the ‘Pauline Epistles,’ to be discursive constructsthat resulted from the social activities and collective interests of subsequent generations workingwith a host of raw materials from various of their many pasts. For instance, many scholars ofChristian origins are rather suspicious of treating Luke/Acts as a resource for understandingthe earliest Jesus movements, given both the suspiciously uniform portrait it offers of their earlyintentions and effects as well as the later period to which it can be dated. I use the adjectives ‘so-cial’ and ‘collective’ to underscore that the institutions that enable artifacts from prior socialworlds to be preserved, collected, archived and continually reinterpreted and applied to newand previously unforeseen situations are not in fact coterminous with the interests of any oneagent; they are, instead, the non-intentional results from the commingling of large numbers of in-tentional actors, collaborating, disagreeing, forming and undermining coalitions and remainingsilent at opportune times.28If this view of history informed our reading of ‘the past’, then the Book of Acts does not nec-essarily tell us anything about an intentional agent’s choices, and the present is not the direct re-sult of any of these choices. In addition, adopting this view of history as a continual, hindsightconcoction makes it increasingly difficult to speak of ‘the West’ as a coherent historical formation,for if the world is mute about itself, then so too are those things we call civilisations, making allclaims about ‘the West’ or ‘the Western mind’ (p. 128), let alone claims concerning their originarypoint and their lines of historical development, techniques that a specific ‘we’ in the present use toorganise the unwieldy world of competing interests and sensations. Perhaps the discourse on ‘theWest’ is part of our cosmographic formation! If so, then much of what Dubuisson writes of thestrategic uses for ‘religion’ is equally applicable to our own work as scholars. Like the essentialistswho yet cling to ‘experience’, so the individual, intentional subject we find at places in his text,seems yet to presume the existence of an ‘unchanging transcendence’ (pp. 130e1). Although hisnotion of transcendence is hardly the ‘benevolent divine providence intervening in the universe’(p. 131) that we find in the work of many other scholars of religion, it nonetheless shares in a num-ber of the assumptions that seem to drive those whom Dubuisson criticises so well. If Dubuisson iscorrect, if all human beings set about the work of building a comprehensive world by drawing ona similar set of techniques, then it should be no surprise to find ourselves in our own data set. De-spite some authors’ best intentions, their historicisations of the category religion, along with theircriticisms of the interrelated faith/institution, apolitical/political and private/public classifications,risk reproducing the very conditions they thought they were criticising. Grafton phrases it, ‘Whenany discipline takes a new shape, antitraditionalist rhetoric becomes the standard mode of framing28 This view of archiving the past is influenced by Trouillot, 1995. My thanks to Willi Braun for bringing this book tomy attention.164S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178one’s work as virtuous and innovative, and several Hindenburgs are produced for every Spirit ofSt Louis’ (Grafton, 2001, p. 75).If my assessment is persuasive, then we must be on the lookout for critiques of ‘religion’ that,knowingly or not, re-admit through the side door that which was kicked out by the front. Case inpoint: Jeremy Carrette and Richard King’s recent $elling Spirituality. While both authors are knownfor their suspicion of what they characterise as the imperial and oppressive foundations of the im-ported category religion (see King, 1999), their current work nonetheless advocates for an ‘engagedspirituality’, lamenting the commodification of what they characterise as ‘the world’s religious tra-ditions [which] provide the richest intellectual examples we have of humanity’s collective effort tomake sense of life, community, and ethics’ (Carrette and King, 2005, p. 182). Or consider AaronKetchell’s analysis of tourist attractions in the Ozarks region of Missouri (see Peterson and Walhof,2001, pp. 156e75). Despite appearing in a book entitled The Invention of Religionda book in whichcontributors seek to historicise the category religiondKetchell’s chapter seems only to criticise themanner in which such prior, internal things as ‘pious impulses’ and ‘religious sentiments’ are com-monly manifested in tacky, popular culture. Or perhaps we could even cite David Chidester, whoselatest collection of essays on religion and American popular culture, Authentic Fakes (2005), aims torecover this thing he calls ‘human authenticity’. Despite being known for his earlier historical workon the colonial impact of early comparative religion in Southern Africa (see Chidester, 1996), hiseffort to contextualise religion nonetheless uncovers the pan-human kernel that might otherwisego unnoticed. In the opening to his new book he writes:At work and at play, human authenticity is at stake in American religion and popular culture.Religion is the real thing but, as we already know from the world of advertising, Coca-Cola isalso the real thing. Baseball, rock ‘n’ roll, McDonald’s and Disney, Tupperware and Nike,along with all the other permutations of the popular, have artificially produced a real world.Religion, mediated through popular culture as ordinary leisure and entertainment but also ashuman possibility and experimentation, has appeared in the traces of transcendence, thesacred, and the ultimate in these cultural formations. (Chidester, 2005, pp. 9e10)Apparently, there is a really real and an artificial, and the artificial is capable of mediating thereal, thereby providing us with glimpses of the ultimate in the most unlikely of places, such asfood storage systems. How this differs from van der Leeuw’s work on manifestations of the reli-gion or Eliade’s work on hierophanies popping up in unexpected sites, I am not sure.All of which brings to mind Grafton’s description of Pope Sixtus V’s (1521e1590) efforts toresurrect the relics of Egyptdarchitectural anachronisms in desperate need of retooling if theywere to prove of use in their transplanted setting in the piazza out front of the Vatican. ‘In elab-orate ceremonies’, writes Grafton, ‘the obelisk was exorcised and rededicated to the service of thetrue God; a cross was set on its top, replacing the ball which had once been thought to contain theashes of Caesar Augustus’ (Grafton, 2001, p. 59). With Sixtus V’s exorcisms in mind, we find animportant lesson that can be applied to our efforts to exorcise the imperialism of ‘religion’. Bymeans of our scholarly ceremonials, we sometimes replace a ball said to contain one hero’sashesdstudies intent on divining the deeply held religious experiencedwith a cross thought tohave carried another’s corpsedstudies that, instead, work to uncover the enduring human spiritor the deep ideas that drive history. As the saying goes, the more things change .S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178165Despite not yet being the retooled field’s equivalent to the Spirit of St Louis that touched downat La Bourget Field, just outside Paris, in 1927, unlike many other critiques of ‘religion’ Dubuis-son’s newly translated book is certainly no Hindenburg either. I therefore fear that some of mycriticisms may be mistaken by the hasty reader for something other than disagreements betweencolleagues with shared interests. For those willing to take seriously that human behaviour, and itsscholarship, are all historical products of a happenstance world of competing agents, The WesternConstruction of Religion points them in the right direction by helping to lay to rest some naggingassumptions and troublesome categories. Its shortcomings simply make all the more evident theimportance of its thesis concerning the tenacious hold that these ideas have had on our minds, notto mention the grip these institutions have had on our bodies.ResponseDaniel DubuissonCentre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, FranceE-mail address: daniel.dubuisson@free.frMy primary concern is that we remove our metaphysical presuppositions from the history ofreligions, which should be an exclusively historical and anthropological discipline. Acceptingreferences to any kind of transcendent principle would call into question the place of the disciplineamong the human and social sciences. Those who wish to salvage the notion of ‘religion’ atany price do so not for scientific reasons but with the hope of surreptitiously reintroducing ‘meta-physical’ considerations borrowed generally from Christian ‘religions’ themselves. ‘Religions’are the ‘objects’ that we must analyse, not the ‘tools’ that we must use to understand this humanphenomenon.No concept that is so determined by its exclusively Christian and Western history can act asa universal paradigm in the study of humanity. Yet the concept of ‘religion’ is so intimately linkedto ‘our’ history and culture that it cannot be redefined in any fundamentally different sense. ‘TheWestern religious world’dthis expression seems to me preferable to the word ‘religion’ alonedhas had a single history and polemical structure. Moreover, the adversaries provoked byreligiondthat is to say, by the complex schema associated with the term ‘religion’ (p. 127)dalways define themselves in relation to it. In this sense, Western atheism is a creation peculiarto our culture.My primary focus is the history of the nineteenth- and twentieth-century History of Religionsand the schemata that it established. The field borrowed most of its categories and favouritetopics from the Christian cultural tradition, reflecting the tremendous success of ‘Christian cul-ture’ in the West and therefore of the word ‘religion’. But of course we must not forget thatfor centuries the West imposed (often by force!) its models and categories on societies and culturesthat it first subjugated and then ‘occupied’ (see King, 1999; Fitzgerald, 2000). I have simplyquestioned the idea that humanity is ‘naturally’ religious, the way phenomenologists and Catholictheologians assert. This idea of an innate religious vocation in humanity was borrowed at firstfrom the Christian theology of the Fathers, and it appears in the work of such thinkers as Calvin,166S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178Schleiermacher, Kant, Lafiteau, Renan, Jung and Durkheim. Eliade then made it the fundamentalprinciple of his vision of humanity. But this notion is an ethnocentric fantasy. The new anthro-pology that we try to define must build on other foundations than those that have served our in-digenous, that is to say Christian, anthropology. Our intellectual vocabulary and our ‘way ofthinking’ had been also preceded by centuries of Christian culture! It is therefore difficult to escapethese influences.That is why I propose the heuristic concept of ‘cosmographic formations’ to represent all theconstructionsd‘religious’, ‘symbolic’, ‘cultural’, ‘cosmological’dwith which humans constructtheir worlds, that is to say the worlds as corresponding to human aspirations and requirements.These worlds are presented to us only in the light of our condition as human beings. They arereal creations and not abstract mental representations. As humans, we really do construct ourown worlds. But we can only discover the meaning of these worlds through the textsdpolitical,literary, mythicaldthat represent and justifyjuridical,them.ideological, philosophical,‘religious’,Response to Steven EnglerEngler’s paraphrase of my argument is as faithful as it is excellent. But his critique misreads meat several points:I write of the human sciences, especially the History of Religions, not of chemistry or nuclearphysics. The human sciences, as soon as they move beyond erudite monographs, draw on thebiases or presuppositions of the cultures under study. That is, insofar as they speak in generalabout ‘humanity’, ‘history’, ‘cultures’, or ‘religions’, they act like philosophical systems. At thislevel it is not always easy to differentiate between science and philosophy, as I try to show inthe case of Le´ vi-Strauss (see Dubuisson, 2006). The ‘human sciences’ have no raw data. Theyare interested primarily in the symbolic, cultural and linguistic productions that aim at transform-ing ‘raw data’ into cosmographic facts.The foundational theories of Marx, Durkheim, Weber, Le´ vi-Strauss, Weber and Freud are con-structed on a priori philosophical or metaphysical bases that form a consistent Weltanschauungbut that introduce no strictly scientific criteria. Their presuppositions are indemonstrable! It isfor this reason that I state that ‘people do not live the THE world, . since each human grouplives only in its world’ (p. 204). Here I refer to cosmographic formations, and I mean simplythat George W. Bush, for instance, does not see a world the characteristics of which would bethe same for all people; rather ‘his’ world is shaped by firm beliefs, creeds, prejudices and ideasthat form a ‘particular world’. Clearly, and despite any appearances to the contrary, GeorgeW. Bush and Michael Moore do not live in the same world!In my view there are no ‘raw materials’ for the history of religions, for all relevant ‘objects’have been subjected to a long cultural elaboration. The expression ‘raw materials’ appeals toan epistemology dominated by na€ıve positivism. Yet I am not a ‘relativist’ like Boas and Geertz.I believe that there are anthropological universalsdfor example, ‘symbolic function’dbut I donot believe that these universals are of a ‘religious’ nature. It is the monumental mistake ofmany historians of religion to posit ‘religious’ universals. From an anthropological point ofview the claim has little significance. It stems from a prejudice invented by the Church FathersS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178167(see, for instance, Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica, II.6.1129) and taken up by Christiantradition.I am well aware that it is impossible to step outside of language, a paradox that I have examined indetail, drawing on Wittgenstein and others (see Dubuisson, 1996). But this paradox should not leadus to throw the baby out with the bath water that is to posit an absolute relativism that would par-alyse science and its critical capabilities, which are so necessary today. We must proceed by compar-ison, working with the largest and most complexly structured groups as is possible. In this manner wecan in part escape the limits imposed by our submersion within a particular language.For example, it is entirely possible to ‘translate the body’. We do so by comparing the culturalprocessesdeducation, discipline, initiationdthrough which bodies, at first biologically identical,are transformed into ‘Christian’, ‘Taoist’, ‘communist’ or ‘gnostic’ bodies. In other words, biolog-ical bodies conform to cultural models represented in texts that describe different cosmographicformations. Any Christian body remains real even if it has been shaped by Christian education.That is why I disagree with Engler’s claim that in my view ‘the only agency is that of discursiveconstruction’. I wrote: ‘Each cosmographic formation (re)creates the world and thereby transfig-ures it’ (p. 204). And this world is real even if only our texts, our discursive creations, are capableof providing it with an origin, a meaning, a destiny or a unity. Action, reality and language areabsolutely complementary, as is the case with rituals. I insist, it is true, on ‘discursive construction’because discourse has the final say in determining the meaning of the ‘practical work of religion’.Without tales, without myths, without treaties, without commentaries (learned or traditional), wewould be altogether unable to determine the value of rituals and institutions. (It is also true thatMalinowski’s functionalism is hardly popular in France). Words always have the last word! Thatis why I grant them such importance. Besides, all cultures that we studydgenerally thanks to theirtextsdare very, very talkative. Moreover, we are unable to generate serious hypotheses concern-ing mute cultures of prehistory.I end with a question, one that I would also pose to Robert Segal: what definition, howeverheuristic, of ‘religion’ would Engler himself put forward? It is all too easy to suggest that this no-tion is necessary or irreplaceable when one does not specify what it is. In the spirit of Hans Pen-ner, one might say, ‘a science of religion based upon a mystery remains a mysterious science’.Response to Aaron HughesIn response to comments by Engler and Hughes regarding the ‘French’ nature of my book, it istrue that my book was initially intended for a French audience. As a result, it was not oriented todebates that have been taking place for some years in the United States. It goes without sayingthat I would add today an additional chapter dedicated to these current questions. It is alsotrue that the History of Religions in France and in the U.S. too often ignore each other anddo not deal with precisely the same subjects. It is therefore difficult to address oneself at thesame time to both publics. This intriguing difference deserves to be studied closely.29 ‘There is a something noble and salutary that indicates the name and being of God: for all men had taken this forgranted in their common reasonings, since the Creator of all things had implanted this conviction by innate ideas inevery rational and intelligent soul’. (http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/eusebius_pe_02_book2.htm).168S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178Responding directly to Hughes, I must point out that the important works by Lincoln,McCutcheon, Segal and Wasserstrom ‘on the same topic’ were published after or at the sametime as, not before, the French version of my book (L’Occident et la Religion, 1998). Furthermore,my first analyses of the work of Eliade (Mythologies du XXe sie`cle, 1993) were published in anepoch when majority of the American specialists, with the notable exceptions of John Salibaand Ivan Strenski, ignored the extent to which this work drew on gnostic, esoteric (Gue´ non,Evola, Coomaraswamy), pagan and anti-Semitic themes, these last borrowed by the RomanianFascism of the Thirties.In this context it is wholly unacceptable to put Heidegger, Dume´ zil and Eliade in the same Fascist‘bag’. Dume´ zil was excluded from teaching by the Fascist regime of Vichy because he had beena Freemason! By contrast, Eliade’s support of the Romanian Fascist movement from 1933 till1945 was immensely fuller than was Heidegger’s support of the Nazi movement. It suffices to readA. Laignel-Lavastine (2002) to gauge the extent of Eliade’s participation and hate: ‘Better a Germanprotectorate than a Romania invaded yet again by Yids’ (M. Sebastian, Journal, 20 September 1939).The influence of Lucretius on my formation was deeper and more decisive than that of Heideg-ger, whom, I have yet to read without irritation. In effect, contemporary French thought has beenliterally polluted by his heavy and indigestible German metaphysics.In sum, I argue consistently against the concept ‘religion’, which is ridden with biases and pre-suppositions. Some, like Hughes, do not wish to change this reassuring intellectual skyline that soperfectly corresponds to our intellectual habits and incorrigible prejudices. The role of science isnot to ‘comfort’ us or to maintain our phantasms. Rather, science must remain ‘critical’, in thenoblest sense of the term, aiming to show us things ‘as they are’, not ‘as we think they are’ or‘as we would like them to be’.Response to Robert SegalGenerally speaking, Segal simplifies my ideas, giving them a narrow and rigid interpretation. Inparticular, Segal does not mention my notions of ‘general topics’, ‘exemplary propositions’ and‘major paradigm’ that are fundamental to my argument (see pp. 116e44). We must begin bydiscussing these essential notions!I noted, in particular, that ‘The ancient, rich, structured topics associated with the term ‘religion,’defines, or rather underpins, a huge corpus of knowledge, which in turn permits the investigation ofevery domain to which we attach (at times with considerable trouble and uncertainty) the label‘religious’’ (p. 127). It goes without saying that, within this category, ‘exemplary propositions’ aredeveloped that one finds in no other culture (see p. 140). I specified further that ‘When we attemptto draw up an inventory of the topics around which the field of the history of religions has beenorganized (within the broader context of Western intellectual history), it soon becomes evidentthat this catalog ought to be headed by a certain number of exemplary or paradigmatic oppositions’(for example, theists/atheists; Providentialists/antiprovidentialists) (p. 129). These exemplary,centuries-old oppositions form in turn a ‘major paradigm’ within the intellectual history of theWest. Recall that, in French, a ‘dominant’ or even ‘hegemonic’ point of view is not necessarily theunique or sole point of view. In addition, the presence of a ‘model’ does not imply an implacableand rigid pressure on phenomena. Finally, I noted repeatedly in my book that the Western ideaof religion has taken shape through countless controversies and conflicts.S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178169Re Segal’s point 1): In reality, the differences among rival conceptions are less significant thantheir fundamental agreement that humanity is ‘religious’ by nature and hence that religions areeverywhere! This is so true that nineteenth-century scholars in particular, never thought of callinginto question this obvious prejudice.Re Segal’s point 2): The History of religions has not ‘secularised’ or ‘desacralised’ all of its con-ceptual instruments. And if so-called ‘religious’ concepts and phenomena are objects to be stud-ied, they cannot be at the same time instruments serving to orient these studies. They cannot beboth hammer and nail!Re Segal’s point 4): The theme of difference has unquestionably been important. Yet manyhave tried to overcome this difference to find some ‘first principle’ underlying all religions. Andthis first principle was often imagined as a manifestation of transcendence. After all, how doesSegal explain the colossal success of Eliade’s work in the United States and around the worldwhen it is no more than a tissue of fabrications? More to the point, the ‘scientific’ categories in-tended to represent and comprehend so-called ‘religious’ phenomena generally drew inspirationfrom those predominant in the Christian West. I wholly agree with Segal’s comments on WilliamRobertson Smith. But Smith, as Segal well knows, was a brilliant exception: it was certainly nothis perspective that dominated the nineteenth-century history of religions. Not to mention that hehimself met some few problems during the course of his career.Re Segal’s point 8): This critical interplay of ‘similarity’ and ‘difference’ is both on and offtrack. It has been clear since Sextus Empiricus that such sophisms are incontestable when framedin this sort of paradoxical and abstract form. Only specific cases would allow us to distinguish‘misleading likenesses’ from ‘significant differences’. After all, different things can perform equiv-alent functions, and similar things can perform distinct ones.Re Segal’s point 12): I agree in principle with the reductionist project, but it remains too rooted inreligion as explanandum. ‘Phenomenologists’ and theologians will argue that the kind of ‘function-alist’ view that Segal points to does not give an account of the irreducible peculiarity of religious factsand experience. That is why it seems preferable to say that ‘non-religious’ explanations are based infacts that are also ‘non-religious’. In this way ‘religion’ becomes a superfluous category.Response to Ann TavesThe things that Westerners call ‘religions’ fill an architectonic function, as do all other cosmo-graphic formations. We can easily imagine materialist, atheist or agnostic ‘cosmographic forma-tions’dfor example, Taoism, ancient Buddhism, Epicureanism and twentieth-century Russiancommunism. The concept of cosmographic formations subsumes that of ‘religion’. It is moreglobal, more fundamental and more universal. It is also obvious that ‘Christian religion’ filledthis cosmographic function in Western culture for many centuries.However, the concept of cosmographic formations has a purely heuristic value: ‘it shows nothow some object is constituted, but how, in its light, we must investigate the nature and relationsof the objects of experience in general’ (Kant, 1971, p. 468). Ultimately, this concept could be re-placed by some other, because it is not at all concerned with substituting a new cosmology forthose under examination. Its ultimate ambition isdand is onlyda methodological one; and it re-veals its own ‘system’ progressively, implied by the rules followed in the comparative analysis ofother systems. It is a methoddindifferent to metaphysics, yet concerned with clarifying any170S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178metaphysical phenomena, complex or fragmented, that it may encounter in the course of its study.(Dubuisson, 2006, Introduction)It goes without saying, of course, that a purely heuristic concept need not be hypostasised in theform of timeless essence (eidos). In this sense the notions of ‘religion’ and ‘cosmographic forma-tion’ occupy distinct epistemological levels. The one claims a metaphysical value, where the otheraims only to help us to think a little better!Under these precise epistemological conditions, we can grant the concept of cosmographic for-mations an anthropological role, since we find its expressions in all cultures. But it is not a reflec-tion of our ‘imperialist’ ambitions or ethnocentric fantasies. On the contrary, I doubt that anyindigenous Western categorydfor example, ‘religion’dcould play the same role. In effect, if a no-tion is historically determined by peculiar events and unpredictable accidents, it cannot serve asa universal and timeless category. It is defined by its own history and has no existence apartfrom the contingencies that gave rise to it. Moreover, how can an ancient theological conceptcarry out a scientific function today? Does astrophysics use the principles of medieval astrology?Similarly, would we Westerners accept the idea that ‘dharma’ or ‘Tao’ could serve as an anthro-pological structure defining us intrinsically and fundamentally? Yet we make bold with our idea of‘religion’, persuaded that our indigenous anthropology is the ideal model of any anthropology.Could there be anything more conceited and blindly self important?To those who, like Taves, wish to preserve the idea of religion, persuaded that it can serve asa scientific instrument, I take the liberty of asking: Where are the borders of religion? By whatprinciples are these borders defined? What lies beyonddmythology, wizardry, astrology? Whatelementsdcreed, activities, institutions, objectsdare indispensable to any ‘religion’? Is a ‘religion‘a system, a structure, a collection, an assemblage or a composition? Has it one immutable core orseveral? What is it, or what are they? What decisive authoritydsociological, psychological, polit-ical or metaphysicaldis empowered to explain ‘religious’ phenomena? Should the study of ‘reli-gious’ phenomena be analytical, structural, functional or hermeneutic?Taves’ proposal that ‘a stipulated focus on occasions when people address themselves to imag-inary beings would allow us to focus on processes of category formation (of religion, magic, div-ination, etc.) that are typically suppressed when we begin with a definition of religion’ does notseem to me wholly decisive, because the semio-linguistic mechanisms discovered in these processeswould identify no specifically ‘religious’ character (see Dubuisson, 1994). Besides, categories suchas ‘sorcery’ and ‘religion’dand the opposition under which they are subsumeddare typicallyChristian categories, invented by the Church Fathers in their polemics with the pagans. Theyhaven’t the slightest scientific value.Response to Wilhelm Dupre´Wilhelm Dupre´ ’s summary of my work is one of the most perceptive and faithful that I havehad opportunity to read. Responding to some of his objections will allow me to clarify certainaspects of my thought and method.3030 Regarding foreign gods, I simply wished to signal that, for many, the existence of their gods did not necessarily meanthe non-existence of others! In other words, the opposition between ‘the’ true religion of the one true God and ‘wrong’religions is a typically Christian, and formidably orthodox, idea.S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178171I am, like Dupre´ , perfectly aware of the need to differentiate scientific nomenclature from or-dinary language. Scientific language has analytic and critical capacities that ordinary language willnever have. ‘Notions and ideas with which people live’ are dedicated to justifying, conceptualisingand preserving their world. Hence their main function is at a cosmographic level. For example,where Christian ideas on religion aim to construct Christians and a Christian world, scientificideas regarding the Christian religion, or religion in general, have no such need. On the contrary,scientific ideas can conceptualise the origin of others in the light of historical, philological and an-thropological knowledge.This is why it seems to me aberrant to attempt, as some do, ‘to think religion(s) with the wordsinvented by religion’ (p. 102). Rather, we must transform what has wrongly become an ‘instru-ment of knowledge’ into merely an ‘object of knowledge’. The word ‘religion’ is an indigenouscultural fact to be studied as such, not a tool for the analysis of cultural facts, a fortiori thoseof other cultures.Nor do I believe that ‘the meaning of religion as a cultural reality. has nevertheless a life of itsown’, however this ‘life of its own’ is conceived. The word ‘religion’ and all that it denotes is notgrounded on an immutable essence, on some timeless category, or on any other kind of autono-mous facts independent of any historical determination. The ‘transcendental illusion’ (Kant) con-sists here in allocating to the notion of religion those qualities that invoke religious myths as theirpreferred object. This notion depends on a series of peculiar historical situations, themselves de-termined by a web of equally particular reasons and conditions. We do not hesitate to proclaimour indigenous notions as universally valid. Yet we would no doubt be loath to accept Chinese orInca notions as defining the core of humanity, that is, of ourselves!This is why I reject the possibility of altering or improving the definition of word ‘religion’ to makeit more appropriate for proper anthropological study. This notion is so profoundly anchored in ourculture that we will never be able to use it with a fundamentally different or novel conception, not tomention the fact that many would oppose this possibility as sacrilege. It seems preferable in everyrespect to work with new tools, ones less weighed down and clogged up by a long ideological history.To this end I have offered the more neutral concept of ‘ cosmographic formation’.The ideas of ‘God’ and ‘Being’ have long been inherent in our European intellectual culture,and religion and metaphysics often find common cause on these grounds. Nevertheless, I donot believe that ‘the light of Being’ can shed any light on ‘the concept of religion and the ideaof studying other traditions’. First, the notion of ‘Being’ is too closely linked to our specific phil-osophical history to have any transhistorical value. Once again, the mere fact that one of our cul-tural creations happens to claim universal and timeless status does not make it so. Second, itstrikes me as injudicious to lump together an idiosyncrascy of philosophical and pagan originswith one of Christian origins. Two errors are generally twice as bad and do not necessarily canceleach other out. Finally, and most especially, invoking some form of transcendence in order to ex-plain facts that reveal no more than immanent history and anthropology just creates confusionand the potential for regression to pre-scientific forms of thought.Allow me to more precisely differentiate ‘culture’, ‘religion’ and ‘cosmographic formation’.Clearly, Christianity was for centuries the predominant cosmographic formation in the West. Yetwe can conceive of others that would be in no way ‘religious’. Confucianism, communism, Stoicismand in my opinion the wisdom of Buddha are not ‘religions’ in the Western sense of the word. Theyare cosmographic formations (see Dubuisson, 2004). These formations share something more172S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178universal and essential than that which word ‘religion’ more narrowly evokes. I am tempted to insistthat all cultures are cosmographic formations, but only on condition that they are seen as more thana simple juxtaposition of knowledge, beliefs, uses, norms and values (in the manner of E.B. Tylor).Cultures are a collective and dynamic process that result in the building of the consistent and sensibleworld and the definition of a specifically situated way of life. The ‘human condition’, such as it is, isthe essential component of cosmographic formations.Dropping the word ‘religion’ is not equivalent to parricide or sacrilege. Conducting researchusing more appropriate anthropological concepts would result in considerable heuristic gains.And it would incidentally unmask ‘religionists’ who, working under the flag of History of Reli-gions, act as shameless apologists for some sort of ecumenism.Response to Forrest L. VanceI would like to take advantage of Forrest Vance’s remarkable text in order to examine, froma ‘psychological angle’, the close relation that I postulate between ‘culture’ and ‘cosmographicformation’. These concepts address a double problem: on the one hand the lasting constructionof the ‘self’, of the personality; on the other hand the life that each self confronts. However,the resolution of this double problem is no way ‘religious’. It reaches its end by other means.31Misfortune, death, the meaning of life, the fragility of the self, incurable pain, evils, disastersand many other equally objective facts raise key questions, and cultures answer these in termsthat transcend speculation and na€ıve consolation. Cultures seek first to shape and educate usand to prepare us to confront these tests. Here they reveal in these moments their truest vocation.Cultures answer to other necessities and ends than those that psychology and sociology typi-cally address. These disciplines have never yet managed to explain existence, as though cultureslie outside their various determinismsdfrom Marx to Bourdieu, from Freud to the biological psy-chologies. A similar conclusion emerges from the study of literary inventions, artistic creations,symbolic networks, audacious philosophical speculations, recipes for wisdom and countless formsof ritualisation. Their importance in the life of each person, their universality and their obstinateand continuous reemergence, grant them a central place in any anthropological inquiry.Cultures participate actively in the constitution of individual consciousnesses, of the personal-ities that confront the world and life. Individuals owe much to their strict ‘moral’ education, in-cluding self-awareness, serenity, courage in the face of danger, resistance to suffering, mastery ofemotions, moral rectitude and force of character. These architectonic traits define and organiseour personal ‘character’ and ethos.To succeed in this promethean task, this great discipline, this long ‘moral’ education of human-ity, every culture must make a ‘world’ of itself, in order to exclude contingency and chaos. Thoughever novel and incomplete, each culture is by itself and for itself the best, if not the only, possibleworld. It is in this sense that all cultures culminate in the embedding of a cosmographic formation.It is only by virtue of this embedding that, for instance, ideas of boundaries, customs and normsmake sense and come to be accepted as necessary. Of course, norms have value not only for the31 The following paragraphs draw on Dubuisson, 2004.S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178173group. The internal dispositions that invoke respect are inculcated through training and throughthe consolidation of each individual personality.This subtle alchemy produces an ensemble that constitutes the best part of each individual. The selfowes much to the task of education. Human beings are not born with particular predispositionsdfor example, for asceticism, self-control, courage or a sense of honour. The synthesis that resultsfrom training is not a simple mechanical process. It develops on the basis of tractable and fragilepsychical elements, which are exposed to many dangers. Not is it easy to achieve, since it presumesa constant series of volitional efforts during a long course of confrontations with life’s contingencies.A reflective and controlled conduct of life manifests itself in firmness of character in the face ofadversity and misfortune. Given these same challenges, certain forms of depression, addiction,suicide and wallowing in the anesthesia of conformity represent surrender and demoralisation.We must remember that cultures, as cosmographic formations, are always incomplete, constantlythreatened by the violence of human passions. They rest, when all is said and done, on the moraland intellectual adherence of their members. We must do them the justice of recognising their on-going accomplishments, yet without falling into na€ıve idealism. For the principles they defend arerelative: they acquire significance only within the very same world that they undergird; they ap-pear absurd, extreme or unfair when looked upon from the walls of another world.It remains for us to produce a balanced model of such a being, the mind, feelings, bodily hexis,imagination, memory, beliefs, wishes, etc, that make a Buddhist bhikshu, a brahmin, a Jansenist,a liberal Lutheran, a militant communist, a Confucian sage, a Roman citizen, or a Stoic philos-opher. This task is a prodigious transformation that draws into play the corresponding culturesand cosmographic formations. Could one imagine a grander or higher anthropological ambition?Response to Russell T. McCutcheonI agree entirely with the main arguments that Russell McCutcheon sets out in the first part ofhis brilliant exposition. I appreciate, and know well, the double paradox that he underlines, inwhich the concept of religiondthough a mere historical creation like all human creationsdpurports to designate something timeless and ahistorical, while, moreover, its very vaguenessfurthers this ambition. There is something here that merits serious contemplation and that recallsa well-known lesson: despite, or because of, its vagueness, the poetic text always says much more,and often much better, than any scientific text. This ‘much more’ contains all humanity’s wishesand dreams, all its worries and fears. The struggle is unequal! Criteria of rationality doubtlesshave little to do with the forces that lead to belonging and individual conviction .As for the almost emotional attachment to the term, religion, a lingering allegiance that hindersour detaching from it, I add this supplementary explanation. It seems obvious that the Christiannotion of religion, with its ad hoc assembly of practices and beliefs, has been ubiquitous in oureducation, in our scholastic and intellectual training and in our ‘organic’ membership in a certainculture. As a result, this notion played a fundamental role in shaping our personal formation andour individual development. It became a polymorphous element (cognitive, ideological, psycho-logical and emotional) of our personality and our ways of living.To repeat, the concept of ‘cosmographic formation’ has no more than heuristic value. Any ap-peal to it is tentative, valid only ‘to some extent’, ‘as far as possible’ or ‘by analogy’ (all these174S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178expressions are borrowed from Kant): ‘In that way, the idea is properly an heuristic not an osten-sive concept. It shows not how an object is constituted, but how, under its direction, we must seekout the nature and continuity of the objects of experience in general’ (Kant, 1971, p. 468).It is not surprising that the expression ‘cosmographic formation’ evokes our indigenous con-cept of religion. Quite simply, we must reverse the order of explanation, recalling that the Chris-tian notion of religion functioned as the predominant cosmographic formation in the West formany centuries. In this light, ‘religion’ must be considered alongside other phenomena that arecomparable in functional, not metaphysical, terms. What counts is not resemblance of metaphys-ical ideas but homology of anthropological functions.There are, however, two points at which I diverge from McCutcheon, or rather from the de-structive epistemology developed in the second part of his exposition. It is comparatively easyto imagine today a critical perspective linking Foucault’s historicism, radical materialism,Buddhist critiques of ontological propositions, Boas’ cultural relativism, and the subversive verveof the ancient Sophists and skeptics. This cocktail would pack quite a punch, leaving those whoindulge in it somewhat tipsy from imbibing the product of twenty-five centuries’ fermentation ofthe seeds of idealism and essentialism.However, it is important to resist the temptation of this drunkenness. I fear that this radicaldeconstruction leads to the dissolution of ‘humanity’ and of any possibility of its study. Certainlyit is worth considering the proposal that all human creations are, to evoke Buddhism, ephemeral,composite, relative, anonymous, conditioned, denuded of any pure nature, etc. But it seems un-tenable to conclude with certainty that these creations are in no way comparable. In my view,the prolegomena to any future anthropology rests precisely on such comparisons, evoking nowKant.I do not believe that ‘individual agents’ are mere images of the collective representations oftheir time. (Foucault, at least, did not think so of himself!) To hold this view would be todeny individuals qua agents any influence on history. I would say rather that certain personalitiesfor example, Paul, Augustine, Luther, Calvin, Jean de la Croix, Schleiermacher knew better, thanothers how to make original syntheses of the ideas of their time and how to transcend these ideas,sensing certain future evolutions. At any rate precisely thisdsomething not impersonaldoccasionally arises from simple ways of expressing diffuse and collective feelings. It’s calledtalent . or genius!ConclusionIn sum, my heuristic notion of ‘cosmographical formation’ has a fourfold goal:1. To ground our anthropological studies of symbolism and human cultures in something otherthan Christian anthropological categories. Humanity is not naturally or congenitally ‘reli-gious’ as theologians and phenomenologists assert.2. To represent the many constructions (for example, ‘religious’, ‘symbolic’, ‘political’, ‘cul-tural’, ‘cosmological’) by means of which humans construct their own worlds, that is, theworlds that correspond to human aspirations and needs. These worlds are presented to usonly in the light of our condition qua human beings. They are real creations and notS. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178175abstract mental representations. As humans, we really do construct our own worlds; that isour primary characteristic.3. To eliminate insoluble metaphysical questions from our scientific debates.4. To provoke a healthy epistemological inversion: our indigenous and ‘religious’ categoriesmust be considered as ‘objects of study’, not as tools of knowledge.Finally, greater breadth of applicability is a key value of the notion of ‘cosmographic forma-tion’. It includes what we in the West call ‘religions’. But since it is not based on the same prin-ciples, this notion can also apply to the cosmographies of atheists, agnostics and materialists. Inthe light of this approach, distinctions such as religious/non-religious become negligible: the worldaccording to Epicurus, according to Confucius, according to Buddha, according to Luther andaccording to Marx are all examples of ‘cosmographic formations’. They are worth studying underthis label and according to this perspective. This kind of approach will teach us much more abouthumanity than perpetual reassessments by theologians and phenomenologists of our ‘religiousnature’.ReferencesAdler, A., 1927. The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology Trans. by Radin, P. Harcourt. Brace and World,New York.Ali, A., 1988. Al-Qur’(cid:2)an: A Contemporary Translation (Trans.), [1984]. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.Arnal, W. Doxa, heresy, and self-construction: the pauline ekklesiai and the boundaries of urban identities. In: Iricin-schi, E., Zellentin, H. (Eds.), Making Selves and Marking Others: Heresy and Self-Definition in Late Antiquity.Mohr Siebeck, Tu¨ bingen (in press).Baritz, L., 1960. The Servants of Power: A History of the Use of Social Science in American Industry. WesleyanUniversity Press, Middletown, CT.Beattie, J., 1964. Other Cultures. Free Press, New York.Benavides, G., 1997a. Postmodern disseminations and cognitive constraints. Religion 27, 129e138.Benavides, G., 1997b. Magic, religion, materiality. Historical Reflections/Re´ flexions Historiques 23, 301e330.Benavides, G., 2000. What raw materials are used in the manufacture of religion? Culture and Religion 1, 113e122.Benavides, G., 2001. Religious studies between science and ideology. Religious Studies Review 31, 105e108.Boring, E.G., 1950. A History of Experimental Psychology [1929]. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.Bridgman, P., 1928. The Logic of Modern Physics. Macmillan, New York.Carrette, J., King, R., 2005. $elling Spirituality: The Silent Takeover of Religion. Routledge, London.Chidester, D., 1996. Savage Systems: Colonialism and Comparative Religion in Southern Africa. University Press ofVirginia, Charlottesville.Chidester, D., 2005. Authentic Fakes: Religion and American Popular Culture. University of California Press,Berkeley.Davis, R.H., 2002. Review of Inden, R., Walters, J., Ali, D., Querying the Medieval. Journal of Asian Studies 61,1408e1411.Dawood, N.J., (Trans.), 1983. The Koran [1956]. Penguin Books, London and New York.Drake, H.A., 2000. Constantine and the Bishops: The Politics of Intolerance. Johns Hopkins University Press,Baltimore, MD.Dubuisson, D., 1994. Ontogene` se divine et structures e´ nonciatives: La cre´ ation illocutoire d’Agni dans le Rigveda.Revue de l’histoire des religions 211, 224e245.Dubuisson, D., 1996. Anthropologie poe´ tique: Esquisses pour une anthropologie du texte. Trans. by Sayers, W. Pee-ters, Louvain.Dubuisson, D., 2003. The Western Construction of Religion: Myths, Knowledge, and Ideology [1998]. Johns HopkinsUniversity Press, Baltimore, MD.176S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178Dubuisson, D., 2004. Les sagesses de l’homme Bouddhisme, paganisme, spiritualite´ chre´ tienne. Presses du Septentrion,Lille.Dubuisson, D., 2006. Twentieth Century Mythologies: Dume´ zil, Le´ vi-Strauss, Eliade. Trans. by Cunningham, M. Equi-nox, London [1993].Durkheim, E., 1915. The Elementary Forms of The Religious Life. Trans. by Swain, I.W. Macmillan, London [1912].Durkheim, E., 1957. Professional Ethics and Civic Morals. Trans. by Brookfield, C. Routledge and Kegan Paul,London.Engler, S., 2004. Constructionism vs. what? Religion 34, 291e313.Engler, S., Bassnett, S., Bringhurst, R., DiGiacomo, S.M., 2004. Consider translation: a roundtable discussion. Reli-gious Studies Review 30, 107e120.Esposito, J.L., Fasching, D.J., Lewis, T., 2006. World Religions Today, second ed. Oxford University Press, New York.Feuerbach, L., 1967. Lectures on the Essence of Religion [1851]. Trans. by Mannheim, R. Harper and Row, New York.Feuerbach, L., 1989. The Essence of Christianity [1841]. Trans. by Eliot. G. Prometheus Books, Buffalo, NY.Fiske, S., et al. (Eds.), 2003. Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 54. Annual Reviews, Palo Alto, CA.Fitzgerald, T., 2000. The Ideology of Religious Studies. Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York.Fitzgerald, T., 2003a. Playing language games and performing rituals: religious studies as state ideological apparatus.Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 15, 209e254.Fitzgerald, T., 2003b. ‘Religion’ and ‘the Secular’ in Japan: Problems of History, Social Anthropology, and the Study ofReligion. Electronic Journal of Contemporary Japanese Studies. Available from: <http://www.japanesestudies.org.uk/discussionpapers/Fitzgerald.html>.Fitzgerald, T., 2004. The Religion-Secular Dichotomy: A Response to Responses. Electronic Journal of ContemporaryJapanese Studies. Available from: <http://www.japanesestudies.org.uk/discussionpapers/Fitzgerald2.html>.Frankenberry, N.K., 2002. Religion as a ‘mobile army of metaphors’. In: Frankenberry, N.K. (Ed.), Radical Interpre-tation in Religion. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 171e187.Frazer, J.G., 1890. The Golden Bough, first ed. Macmillan, London (2 vols).Frazer, J.G., 1900. The Golden Bough, second ed. Macmillan, London (3 vols).Frazer, J.G., 1911e15. The Golden Bough, third ed. Macmillan, London (12 vols).Frazer, J.G., 1918. Folk-lore in the Old Testament. Macmillan, London (2 vols).Freud, S., 1968. The Future of an Illusion [1927]. In: J. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works ofSigmund Freud, Vol. 21. Hogarth Press, London. Trans. by Strachey, 3e57.Geertz, C., 1968. Islam Observed. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.Geertz, C., 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures. Basic Books, New York.Geertz, C., 1995. After the Fact. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.Geuter, U., 1993. The Professionalization of Psychology in Nazi Germany. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Glasse´ , C. (Ed.), 1989. The Concise Encyclopedia of Islam. Harper and Row, San Francisco.Grafton, A., 2001. Bring Out Your Dead: The Past as Revelation. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.Grayling, A.C., 1988. Wittgenstein. Oxford University Press, New York.Hanson, N., 1958. Patterns of Discovery. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Inden, R., 2001. Imagining India. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ [1990].Inden, R., Walters, J., Ali, D., 2000. Querying the Medieval: Texts and the History of Practices in South Asia. OxfordUniversity Press, New York.Kant, I., 1971. Critique de la raison pure. Trans. by Tremesaygues, A., Pacaud. B. Presses Universitaires de France,Paris.Kermode, F., 2000. The Sense of an Ending: Studies in the Theory of Fiction with a New Epilogue, second ed. [1967]Oxford University Press, New York.King, R., 1999. Orientalism and Religion: Postcolonial Theory, India and ‘The Mystic East’. Routledge, London andNew York.Koch, S., 1969. Psychology cannot be a coherent science. Psychology Today, 14e68.Koch, S., Leary, D. (Eds.), 1985. A Century of Psychology as Science. McGraw-Hill, New York.Kuhn, T.S., 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.Laignel-Lavastine, A., 2002. Cioran, Eliade, Ionesco, l’oubli du fascisme. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.Lewis, B., Pellat, C., Schacht, J. (Eds.), 1965. The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. I, second ed. Brill, Leiden.S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178177Lincoln, B., 1996. Theses on method. Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 8, 225e227.Lyotard, J., 1984. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.Trans. by Bennington, G., Massumi, B.Masuzawa, T., 2005. The Invention of World Religions: Or, How European Universalism Was Preserved in the Lan-guage of Pluralism. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.McCutcheon, R.T., 1997. Manufacturing Religion. Oxford University Press, New York.McCutcheon, R.T., 2001. Critics Not Caretakers: Redescribing the Public Study of Religion. State University of NewYork Press, Albany.McCutcheon, R.T., 2004. Religion, ire, and dangerous things. Journal of the American Academy of Religion 72,173e193.McCutcheon, R.T., 2005a. The perils of having ones cake and eating it too: some thoughts in response. Religious Stud-ies Review 31, 32e36.McCutcheon, R.T., 2005b. ‘Religion’ and the Domestication of Dissent, or, How to Live in a Less than Perfect Nation.Equinox, London.Monk, R., 1990. Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. Penguin Books, New York.Montano, R., 2002. Valla, Lorenzo. In: Marthaler, B.L. (Ed.), New Catholic Encyclopedia, second ed. Thomson Gale,Detroit, vol. 15, pp. 376e377.Novick, P., 1988. That Noble Dream. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Paden, W., 2000. World. In: Braun, W., McCutcheon, R.T. (Eds.), Guide to the Study of Religion. Continuum,London, pp. 334e347.Park, C.L., 2003. The psychology of religion and positive psychology. Psychology of religion newsletter 28, 4.Penner, H.H., 2002. You don’t read a myth for information. In: Frankenberry, N.K. (Ed.), Radical Interpretation inReligion. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 153e170.Perkins, J., 1995. The Suffering Self: Pain and Narrative Representation in the Early Christian Era. Routledge, Londonand New York.Peterson, D., Walhof, D. (Eds.), 2001. The Invention of Religion: Rethinking Belief in Politics and History. RutgersUniversity Press, New Brunswick, NJ.Preus, J.S., 1987. Explaining Religion: Criticism and Theory from Bodin to Freud. Yale University Press,New Haven CT.Prosser, P.E., 2001. Church history’s biggest hoax. Christian History and Biography 72, 35.Pyysia¨ inen, I., Anttonen, V. (Eds.), 2002. Current Approaches in the Cognitive Science of Religion. Continuum,London and New York.Reader, I., 2004. Ideology, academic inventions, and mystical Anthropology: Responding to Fitzgerald’s errorsand misguided polemics. Electronic Journal of Contemporary Japanese Studies. Available from: <http://www.japanesestudies.org.uk/discussionpapers/Reader.html>.Richards, E., 1882. The Chemistry of Cooking and Cleaning: A Manual for Housekeepers. Estes and Lauriat, Boston.Rieff, P., 1959. Freud: The Mind of the Moralist. Viking Press, New York.Rieff, P., 1966. The Triumph of the Therapeutic: Uses of Faith After Freud. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.Robinson, J., 1963. Honest to God. Westminster Press, Philadelphia.Saler, B., 2000. Conceptualizing Religion: Imminent Anthropologists, Transcendent Natives, and Unbounded Cate-gories [1993]. Berghahn Books, New York and Oxford.Segal, R.A., 2001. In defense of the comparative method. Numen 48, 339e373.Shweder, R., 1991. Thinking through Cultures: Expeditions in Cultural Psychology. Harvard University Press, Cam-bridge, MA.Smart, N., 1994. Retrospect and prospect: the history of religions. In: Bianchi, U. (Ed.), The Notion of ‘Religion’‘L’Erma’ di Bretschneider,the XVI IAHR Congress.in Comparative Research: Selected Proceedings ofRome.Smith, J.Z., 1998. Religion, religions, religious. In: Taylor, M.C. (Ed.), Critical Terms for Religious Studies. Universityof Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 269e284.Smith, W.R., 2002. Religion of the Semites, second ed. Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, NJ [1894].Spong, J., 1988. Why Christianity Must Change or Die. HarperCollins, New York.Spong, J., 2001. A New Christianity for a New World. HarperCollins, New York.178S. Engler, D. Miller / Religion 36 (2006) 119e178Strenski, I., 1998. On ‘religion’ and its despisers. In: Idinopolus, T.A., Wilson, B.C. (Eds.), What is Religion? Origins,Definitions, and Explanations. Brill, Leiden, pp. 113e132.Trouillot, M.-R., 1995. Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History. Beacon Press, Boston.Tylor, E.B., 1958. Primitive Culture [1913], fifth ed. Harper Torchbooks, New York [1st ed. 1871].Vacant, A., et al., 1908e1950. Dictionnaire de The´ ologie Catholique 15 vols. Libraire Letouzey et Ane´ , Paris.Vaihinger, H., 1925. The Philosophy of ‘As If’: A System of the Theoretical, Practical and Religious Fictions of Man-kind. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York.White, H., 1973. Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth Century Europe. Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, Baltimore, MD.