ELSEVIER Artificial Intelligence 93 ( 1997 ) 105 167 Artificial Intelligence Dynamic reasoning with qualified syllogisms Daniel G. Schwartz’ Department of Computer Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee. FL 32306-4019, USA Received January 1996: revised January 1997 Abstract A gualij%e~ syllogism is a classical Aristoteiean syllogism that has been “qualified” through the use of fuzzy quantifiers, likelihood modifiers, and usuality modifiers, e.g., “Most birds can Ry; Tweety is a bird; therefore, it is likely that Tweety can fly.” This paper introduces a formal logic Q of such syllogisms and shows how this may be employed in a system of nonmonotonj~ reasoning. In process are defined the notions of path logic and dynamic reasoning system (DRS) The former is an adaptation of the conventional formal system which explicitly portrays reasoning as an activity that takes place in time. The latter consists of a path logic together with a multiple- inhe~tance hierarchy. The hierarchy duplicates some of the info~ation recorded in the path logic, but additionally provides an extralogical spec#icity relation. The system uses typed predicates to formally distinguish between properties and kinds of things. The effectiveness of the approach is demonstrated through analysis of several “puzzles” that have appeared previously in the literature, e.g., Tweety the Bird, Clyde the Elephant, and the Nixon Diamond. It is also outlined how the DRS particular, predicate circumscription, a framework accommodates other reasoning techniques-in “localized” version of default logic, a variant of nonmonotonic logic, and reason maintenance. Furthermore it is seen that the same framework accomodates a new formulation of the notion of unless. A concluding section discusses the relevance of these systems to the well-known fiame problem. @ 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. ic;e?‘~~rds: Default reasoning; Dynamic reasoning systems; Fuzzy likelihood; Fuzzy probabilities; Fuzzy quanti~~rs; Multiple inheritance; Nonmonotoni~ reasoning; Qualified syllogisms; The frame problem; Unless ’ E-mail: schwartz@cs.fsu.edu. 0~4.3702/97/$17.~ @ 1997 Elsevier Science E.V. All rights reserved. PIJ SOOO4-3702(97)00020-9 104 D.G. Sclwartz/Arfificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 1. Introduction 1.1. Background Modern logic was originated aimed in p~ticul~ the foundations of mathematics. for the mathematical that of a formal completeness, about a century ago, with its development tialIy at investigating were fo~ulated, including the associated notions of proof, consistency, so on. Several schools of thought arose concerning what one should grounding these, Intuitionism constructive mathematics putability. This in turn played a key role in the development revived anew the centuries old vision of a “thinking machine” first computers were being only for mathematical to make computers perform ever more sophisticated birth to the subdiscipline ini- In process many key concepts logical system together with syntax versus semantics, and take as a solid forth of the notion of com- of computer science, and it the not quest then gave that these could be programmed reasoning. The subsequent it was noted but also logical invented, computations, types of mental activities (as in [ 1781). When disciplines. Among led to formulations known as AI. [ 76]), which brought (see Shortly after computers were first being programmed to perform logical deductions, that the notion of formal system which had served so well for all the that of mathematics would not be adequate importance was the discovery for encoding is oftentimes nonmonotonj~ it was found the foundations however, exploring salient aspects of natural human reasoning. Of critical everyday reasoning may lead one under conditions the situation certainty; but when the available conclusions additional keeping be obtained. Since information. inferences information to go back and retract old conclusions. information in that the addition of new information of incomplete then one’s tentatively, at hand, in mind only monotonic the set of derivable reasoning activity conclusions to be expressed. (theorems), in that the acquisition of new information This style of reasoning If one has perfect knowledge in principle can is less than complete, arises regarding be drawn with absolute then one can draw should is to expand it does not allow for this newer kind of type of formal system serves generally that these may become the conventional (axioms) invalid Hence in the interests of creating machines with more human-like “intelligence”, there for identifying ensued a concerted effort to identify and formalize various aspects of this nonmonotonic [ 1041, behavior. An early work of this genre is the 1969 paper by McCarthy and Hayes now well-known the seeds of several later developments. calculus, a new kind of formalism embodying in a expressed with language admitting modal operators a set of rules specifying how a history may be grown by adding new propositions. For example, the frame problem. That work contained In particular, a history-namely, ~zormally, and probably-together a sequence of propositions it introduced the situation consistent, normally(q5), consistent( q5) t- probably( (p) says that if 4 is normally respect probably true. to the existing history), true, and 4 is consistent with what is known so far (i.e., with that 4 is then one may add to the history the assertion D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 105 A decade later, four separate approaches to nonmonotonicity appeared almost simul- [ 251. This provided a mechanism system truth maintenance track of logical dependencies taneously. First was Doyle’s for keeping retraced, and formerly held conclusions a resemblance conclusions but also because certain other propositions have more recently been dubbed reason maintenance is the reasons see [ 1631). for conclusions that are at issue, rather to the earlier notion of history, but also offers are held, not only because certain earlier propositions can be retracted. The resulting in such a way that derivation steps can be formalism bears that feature are held (are “in”), are not held (are “out”). Such formalisms the novel the fact that it truth (e.g., than their objective systems reflecting individuals that the only Second was McCarthy’s method of circumscription to have P. In effect, one “circumscribes” asserting conjecture” by virtue of which one assumes certain property P are those that are explicitly axioms) have P by tentatively considers affairs-it body of information. Nonmonotonicity found that also have property P. These are then added to the formalism, and conclusions (conjectures) [ 1001. This provided a “rule of x that have a of the that must that this is all there are. The kind of formalism one thus represents a snapshot of the current state of the present are that one might reasonably enters when further in circumscriptive contains the collection of individuals smaller set than before. (i.e., as a consequence all conclusions draw, given subsequently individuals reasoning required Third was Reiter’s default are redrawn, yielding a potentially logic [ 1501. This introduced derivation schemata such as Bird(x) : MCanFly( x) CanFly( x) taken to assume is a modal operator that, if x is a bird, and it is consistent that x can fly. As with circumscription, and conjectures. Given information, one concludes where M as saying infer (by default) snapshot of the current knowledge the absence of any countervailing later time, however, it is learned be expanded by adjoining redrawn based on this new, enlarged axiom set, and if there happens theorem asserting and the earlier to express “is consistent”. The rule is interpreted that x can fly, then one may the resulting is a is a bird, and in that Tweety that Tweety can fly. If at a say, then the formalism would are to be an axiom or this fact about Tweety as a new axiom. Then conclusions fly, CanFly( Tweety) now becomes inference made by default that Tweety is a penguin, that penguins inconsistent, is blocked. formalism cannot Last is the nonmonotonic spirit with Reiter’s default “is consistent”; element of the language, by the formula but the style of formalism logic of McDermott and Doyle logic, in that it too employs a modal operator M expressing is much different. Here JW is made an explicit so that the sense of the foregoing default rule is here expressed [ 1071. This is similar in Bird(x) A M[CanFly(x)] + CanFly for this system The language tics, with M being possible”. The intent is provided with a Kripke-style as roughly equivalent with interpreted is that, if the there is a possible world in which Tweety “possible worlds” seman- “is the classical modality is a bird 106 D.G. Sclzwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 to infer that Tweety can fly. But if there are further propositions that can fly, then both conditions of the above inference hold, and one can apply classical Modus Ponens asserted, e.g., to the effect that Tweety fly, then there will be no possible world in which Tweety can fly. In this case the condition M [CanFly( will fail to hold, and the inference cannot be employed. Again a snapshot of current knowledge, from that knowledge; possibly represents together with whatever conclusions may be inferred are redrawn, a smaller set of conclusions will result. is added, and conclusions and as new information the formalism and penguins is a penguin cannot A later development was McCarthy’sformula [ 1011, a generalization of the earlier version which, to avoid confusion was here renamed predicate circumscrip- tion. McCarthy attributed to “express the facts and non-monotonic the ability of birds to fly” to Marvin Minsky, and he presented numerous may be applied to create logical formalisms adequate how formula circumscription reasoning concerning circumscription the challenge to this task. illustrating examples While McCarthy and Hayes [ 1041 had suggested the use of a modality that it would be inappropriate First, “it is not clear how to attach probabilities in a way that corresponds necessary to assign numerical probabilities expressing to assign numerical prob- to to the amount of conviction available”. To this one might also add the observation in terms of numerical probabilities. Hence systems, numerical probabilities that humans is them- in the interests of need not (and they also argued propositions. quantifiers to individual containing “probably”, abilities statements people have”. Second, “the information not ordinarily selves almost never reason developing more human-like perhaps should not) be explicitly portrayed. reasoning This of course does not conflict with the earlier suggestion In effect the proposal there was to employ a “qualitative” probability, to include probability as rather however, all four approaches they in one way or another adopt in the absence of any counter- can be applied, while inference should such as it is the proba- it is just as common this assumption Indeed above avoid a modality. than a numerical described the more straightforward information, vailing at the same information commonly bilistic approach originally as the nonprobabilistic Hence perhaps employed time holding later be obtained. This approach in reserve the option to revise is clearly a natural one, inasmuch in normal everyday proposed variety. reasoning. But by the same token, is also quite natural. forward for this reason alone, reasoning it. Similar reasoning has resisted being put to rest. Rich the prospect of somehow applying probability [ 1521 expressed reasoning”, could be treated as a form of “likelihood thoughts were expressed by Ginsberg to nonmonotonic theory the view that default but did not develop carried also [ 221). The latter presents a “symbolic generalization” on the abstract notion of a “degree of support”. This provides of probability theory, while removing of qualitativeness Halpern and Rabin [60], and then [ 211 (see theory, based theory the key elements of Bayesian probability the strict dependence on numerical evaluations. The same variety [ 1241, [ 661. These systems are based on [ 671, and Halpern and McAllester is shared with the formulations of likelihood due to Nilsson the doctoral dissertation that it preserves by Darwiche of probability in the sense a qualitative [ 621 and through one. That suggestion this issue altogether. notwithstanding, Instead reasoning one simply assumes strategy wherein, that a certain D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 107 a Kripke-style possible-worlds of the underlying reachability those based on probability theory. semantics, however, taking likelihood as a reinterpretation relation, and hence yield a much different formalism than [ 1,2,4] presentation of the (nonmonotonic) led to the award-winning and it uses Adams’ notion of “high probability” line of thought exploits Adams’ probability, In parallel with these studies was Pearl’s development of the “e-semantics” doctoral dissertation [ 1321 and by Geffner of the logical condi- as typically and normally. To wit, an as- the System Z [ 1331, which [ 591. This tional as a conditional an interpretation sertion such as “Typically birds can fly” is represented by there being a high probability that an arbitrarily chosen bird will be able to fly. The idea of interpreting ditional circles by Lewis tain limitations of this approach, has undergone and it plays a crucial line of development Dubois and Prade cer- lo], role in the systems being presented here (Section 2.4). A related objects” due to deserving of mention [ 291. [ 1491 and has been taken up in philosophical result”, establishing [ 27,108,l in this way dates back to Ramsey is the study of “conditional [ 1671. Lewis’s “triviality [ 931 and Stalnaker the logical con- investigation subsequent modifiers theory [ 32,331 based on their developments that “high probability” Adams [ 31 had further argued all. Analogously with the above, an assertion may be represented be a B. This to nonmonotonicity. A continuation of the Adams-Pearl by there being a high probability interpretation was not employed, however, in possibility could be interpreted as almost to the effect that “Almost all A’s are B’s” chosen A will approach in the Pearl-Geffner that an arbitrarily line of thought has emerged in the works of [ 11,121. and Koller Bacchus These papers develop [ 9, IO], Halpern [ 651, and Bacchus, Grove, Halpern, that allow for expressions such as formalisms Pr[CanFly(x) 1 Bird(x)] E 1 taken as expressing “Almost all birds can fly”, which “Typically birds can fly”, and expressions such as in turn is taken as representing Pr[Hep(x) / Jaun(x)] = 0.8 taken as expressing theory of “statistical modifier most, has been proposed by Pollock are the foundational “approximately syllogisms”, in probability The main early papers on nonmonotonic studies 80% of patients with jaundice featuring a similar probabilistic have hepatitis”. A of the representation [ 1441. Another related line of development [ 88-901. and statistics due to Kyburg reasoning have been reprinted formalisms, in the collec- together with in [ 1641. This gives a summary of that were in print as information [ 611. An in-depth comparison of most of the foregoing tion several others not considered here, may be found virtually all approaches of that date. Reiter [ 1501 had noted the possible to reasoning with incomplete tonic reasoning, The abovementioned step by developing explicitly encoding in the sense of directly and he regarded this concept as implicit works by Pearl, Halpern, Bacchus, and others relevance of the notion of “most” for nonmono- logic. take this another formalisms containing propositions which can be interpreted as more the idea of “most”. But none of these make the term fully explicit it into the syntax of the languages. in the use of default introducing 108 D.G. Schwart~/A~~ciu~ Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 A body of work oriented toward the latter task has been advanced by L.A. Zadeh, [ 1991 presented for therefore, is a man; a semantics such as most, many, few, almost all, etc.-and the founder of the theory of fuzzy sets. The paper fuzzy quan@rs--modifiers the idea of reasoning with syllogistic Socrates as a fuzzy predicate. Zadeh has developed well-defined very likely, uncertain, unlikely, etc.) and fuzzy usuality modi$ers conferences seldom, etc.). these modifiers offer an appropriate correct approach reasoning. introduced along the lines of “Most men are vain; is given is vain”, where vanity (see Section 2.1) publications likely, (e.g., (e.g., usually, often, that arguments it is ~~~~~~ that Socrates succeeding In addition, he has argued at numerous also for fuuy probabilities In this and numerous to nonmonotonic over the years and intuitively semantics The matter of exactly how semantics these various modifiers are interrelated, however, and for such syllogisms, was not fully explored. Thus it had not been this reasoning was suggested, for nonmonotonic developed. The present work grew initially out of an effort to realize therefore of a concise while a new methodology completely goal. 1.2. Overview The first task, undertaken likelihood” quali$ed syllogisms. “qualified” through “fuzzy a probability which originally application in Section 2, is to define In effect, these are classical Aristotelean the use of fuzzy quantification, is here preferred over “fuzzy probability”, usuality, and likelihood. syllogisms the system Q for reasoning with that have been term (The the latter to mean In contrast with the syllogisms taking is evaluated as a fuzzy number.) considered by Zadeh, we here deal only with the case of fuzzy modifiers predicates. Some examples are to crisp (nonfuzzy) in Most birds can fly. Tweety is a bird. It is likely that Tweety can fly. Usually, Tweety if something is a bird, it can fly. is a bird. It is likely that Tweety can lly. Very few cats have no tails. Felix is a cat. It is very unlikely that Felix has no tail. perspective, From a common-sense tem Q features a completely together with a semantics which validates tic interpretation conditionals two distinct as conditional semantic probabilities. the lower of the modifiers, specified levels, such arguments are certainly intuitively correct. Sys- language, suitable them. The semantics for expressing and it adopts the earlier The system is unorthodox level being multivalent idea of interpreting such syllogisms, is based on a probabilis- logical in that it employs and the (probabilistic) D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 109 upper being bivalent value in case the probability true just [ 0, 1 ] . Thus one obtains a qualitative that the reasoner here deals directly only with the linguistic modifiers-no numerical probabilities (classical). Briefly, a formula of the form LikelyP is assigned value of P falls within a certain subinterval version of probabilistic the of in the sense to reference in the formal syntax. reasoning appears Section 3 shows how a version of the classical modalities, possibility and necessig, in terms of fuzzy quantifiers. This builds on an idea put forth by Rescher true is 1, and for the in the language for Q. can be defined [ 1511. A proposition may be deemed necessary if its probability of being possible if this probability well-known modal of Q as presently construed, but those that can be are validated by the semantics is greater than 0. It turns out that not all the axioms logics K, S4, and S5 (see [ 801) can be expressed Section 4 introduces the notion of a path logic. In a system that offers fuzzy likelihood For to have rules for modifier combination. the desire arises modifiers, example, one might want such rules as there naturally LikelyP UnlikelyP UncertainP LikelyP CertainlyP CertainlyP to say former allows one that, one were to conclude LikelyP, and by another The evidence) conclude UnlikelyP, then one may combine rule asserts, that certainly dominates if by some in effect, likely. line of reasoning of one were to these to conclude UncertainP. The latter (or collection (evidence) line Such rules however cannot be expressed within the system Q. This is because that employs the conventional such value. Otherwise truth (or probability) the valuation system’s definition wherein under any particular a unique order that the first of the above rules be meaningful, occurrences associated with the three different in the second rule, probabilities, while the occurrence as the one in the second premise. the two occurrences of P would need in the conclusion valuation notions of formal system and semantics, each formula must have In however, each of the three different (the subintervals function would not be well-defined. value to have a different probability likelihood modifiers should be nonoverlapping), of P in the premises and should have different should have the same probability Upon reflection it becomes evident that, whenever one applies a rule of this kind, that his reasoning is implicit first example says that, if at a certain has UncertainP, order to express such rules it is necessary a way as to distinguish between then at a later time t” one may conclude UncertainP. Accordingly, to make this temporal aspect explicit the different occurrences of P. is an activity which is taking place time t one has LikelyP, and at another it in time. To wit, the time t’ one in in such The notion of a path logic provides of the conventional adaptation this capability. notion of formal logical In effect this is a straightforward system, obtained by lending 110 D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 special semantic be indexed by their location time step. Then will be distinguished defined as acting on indexed P may have different values. The formula’s extralogical by having different in a label. formulas items, status to derivation paths. Formulas appearing in the path, with each successive in such a path can now the next index representing if the same formula occurs more the different occurrences than once, indices. Probability in such a way that the different occurrences index will be included, valuations can then be of along with other In addition Items added or instructions agent. As examples, to the path by deriving to having a formula be appended so received may represent received formulas from a sensor, or messages to the path might be new beliefs, it from earlier formulas, a formula may be received from an external source. This choice of terminology the view that a path logic may be regarded as a part of the “mind” of a digital reflects input (hardware or software) from a human user, data collected from another facts (i.e., beliefs held similar agent. log into with absolute certainty), website X, or send a message its status indicator from “on” to “off”. A formula (also recorded inferences. This new with status set to “off” formalism also allows that the language itself may grow, for example, by introducing new symbols, and as well it admits addition of new inference individual names or predicate rules. Collectively, to a propositional knowledge base which evolves over time. Nonmonotonicity is retracted. A way in which such retractions may be negotiated version of Doyle’s truth (or reason) maintenance and then taken up in greater detail in Section 7. to agent Y). A belief may be retracted by turning in the formula’s a belief through a modified features make a path logic amount system will be outlined is no longer available to perform an action for use in further occurs whenever these various in Section 5 turn right, label) (e.g., Shoham [ 157,158] has also explored the idea of making reason about is with modeling state. As such, the way an agent might the present concern the formalism. But those works deal with formalizing i.c., with modeling ternal world, whereas own mental bodies some of the same in incorporating There, as with Shoham’s earlier works, ning. the present work is more ideas as, the “agent-oriented” recent approach [ 1591. A more to reasoning probability the main concern changes time an explicit temporal events feature of one’s reasoning about change, in the ex- in the reasoner’s in spirit with, and in fact em- system outlined by Shoham one [ 681. is with robot motion plan- theory, has been proposed by Hanks and McDermott about change, and furthermore [ 34,36-38, as with path logics, reasoning The present work bears several elements students (formerly in time. Similarly steps, and the present notion of a “path” notion of a sequence of formulas a somewhat different toward a different inheritance is with reasoning with planning those of Perlis and his in common with 109, 1381. These various writings develop a theory of “active logics” “step logics”) which also portrays reasoning as an activity which is “situated” time in discrete identical with their logics employ are oriented is with modeling multiple- (see the following), while there the concern changing. Recent works have dealt 1471. communication that are dynamically inter-agent set of problems. The present concern turns out to be essentially [ 35, 125- 1271 and with arranged along a “time is viewed as occurring about static domains style of formalism, in the following about domains however, and line”. Path [ 63,64,140, reasoning D.G. SchwartdArtijkial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 Ill Another Sandewall’s [ 1551. recent work suggesting that reasoning might be portrayed as time-situated is Both path logic and active logic embody a view of reasoning that is expressed also by as a collection agent’s knowledge revision” due to Gardenfors the totality of the reasoning [ 57,581, of “knowledge and Halpern [ 3 11. In these frameworks is represented time steps, with each step typically in the knowledge revision” [ 53-551. [ 1891, and of “belief change” due to Friedman treatment of some of these same issues has been studied by Dubois and and of propositions which evolves over a series of the methods of “belief due to Wrobel A possibilistic Prade beliefs discrete of propositions the problem of “logical omniscience” up more recently by Fagin and Halpern [ 45,461. This problem represent an agent’s knowledge, certain the world, those facts. Thus one is led to an unrealistic model of both human and digital reasoning. This difficulty evolving has either assumed or deduced as of that step, and nothing a new approach to [77] and then taken [44] and Fagin, Halpern, Moses, and Vardi to formal that if the reasoner knows of is that when one uses a conventional in the formalism in time. At each time step, the knowledge base contains only what the reasoner is neatly avoided by the newer formalisms which represent knowledge as this constitutes first discussed by Hintikka either an addition or a retraction then he also knows all possible logical consequences base. As such, logical system it is inherent facts about involving further. via path logic reasoning, the temporal aspects of everyday to the issue of reasoning with defaults. A particularly turns next to Reiter’s style of default hierarchies. Here one employs a taxonomy reasoning has arisen for keeping a penguin is a kind of bird, a bird is an associated list of properties, and the properties of their higher-level through the use of track of the relation is a kind it kinds Having thus explicated such inheritance there inherit that entities at lower to fly. The underlying the present work useful alternative inheritance between different kinds of things-e.g., etc. With each such kind of animal, is agreed levels b_~ default, unless properties. For example, a penguin might to fly, since of being able of being unable more specific Early [ 1731). A closely [ 1121 and later discussed by Hayes a particular together with a collection of “slots” representing These various [ 39,40,43,119, commercial have been found [ 17, I8,8 1,177] ), and efforts investigations ideas have subsequently 175,176], with software package KEE kind of things, comprised to harbor some rather unpleasant these lines appeared than higher-level thoughts along related notion [ 16,78,79,83, to resolve (e.g., gone It turns out that most of these difficulties is blocked at the lower levels by countervailing principle inherit all the properties of birds except that this is blocked by the fact that penguins have the property are takes priority. (see also initially by Minsky to a data structure representing in Fahlman’s is that of a “frame” developed information system NETL ones, and the more specific [ 711. This amounts is that lower-level classifications [47] of a field containing the name of the kind, the properties of things of that kind. through several stages of development [ 1191 being more fully developed as the basis for the [48]. These methods of knowledge anomalies, however these problems have led to numerous representation (see for example further 154, 156,162,168] ). inheritance, i.e., allowing none of the works since stem from the need for dealing with multiple that an individual may be of more than one kind. Curiously, to make those of Fahlman, Minsky, and Hayes have bothered 112 D.G. SchwartdArtijiciul Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 implicit, the earlier distinction between properties and kinds. Instead, even though this distinction as just is intuitively themselves kinds of things. This but as will become evident here, this apparent lies at the root of virtually all of the more troublesome the fo~alisms leads style of formalism, treat all collections to a somewhat simplification anomalies. essentially simpler The subject of multiple inheritance is taken up by the present work in Section 5. to as a dynamic reusun~ng s~~~e~~ [91]. referred semantic introduces a new kind of fo~alism interact with one another networks will be inheritance inheritance. The earlier notion of language hierarchies the use of typed nodes to distinguish properties This (DRS). Briefly, a DRS is a temporally evolving structure composed of a path logic and a semantic network which in various ways. The subject of semantic networks has an extensive history, by some accounts dating back to the mid- 1800s. For a recent survey see the edited collection by Lehmann In the present of the variety described treatment, from kinds, and allowing above, including for multiple to employ typed predicate symbols, so as to similarly between predicates formulas having representing is certain if one were to add to the path a formula made in the inheritance hierarchy. For example, that penguins asserting in the to this effect would be made hierarchy, connecting inheritance to a kind node “Penguin” that most birds can fly were to be added to “Bird”; and if a formula stating representing the kind node for “Bird” to a property node the path, a link would be entered connecting and the link would be qualified with the label most. Restrictions representing e.g., connections are made between kind nodes are always crisp (involve only non-fuzzy qualifiers) redundant paths are disallowed. it is agreed to the path, an appropriate then an entry a kind node representing that the hierarchy always remains “well-behaved”, formally that, whenever properties versus kinds. Then for Q is here expanded forms are added and loops and co~esponding distinguish are birds, “CanFly”, to ensure specified entry As such specificity information the inheritance hierarchy dupiicates relation. Each kind node in the path, but it does so in such a way as to provide a basis for defining already expressed by for- the mulas in such a abovementioned way that nodes with higher addresses are lower in the hierarchy, and hence are more specific. The address in the corre- for the path logic which sponding the desired style reference ensures of default that the specificity label. Then formula’s the specificity ranks reasoning. The above requirement ranks will be well-defined. inference in such a way as to correctly perform is taken as a speciJcity rank, and the rank is recorded for maintaining well-behavedness is assigned an address rules can be devised The typing of predicates does not come without cost, however. This is because there in deciding whether a given class of objects should in the well-known the predicates in Section 5). Nonetheless a property versus a kind. For example, it is a matter of choice how one thus regards (see the discussion and “Pacifist” “Republican”, a certain arbitrariness is oftentimes be taken as representing Nixon Diamond problem “Quaker”, it turns out that by judicious anomalies detailed analysis of several “puzzles” that have arisen certain extent serve as test cases for multiple-inheri~nce time-worn that have vexed prior efforts can be avoided. This use of these added extralogical distinctions, most of the through to a the in the literature and which include reasoners. These is demonstrated examples of Tweety and Opus, Clyde the Elephant, and the Nixon Diamond, D.G. Schwurtz/Art@cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 together with several others series illustrates property and a kind. that have appeared more recently. The last example a situation wherein the same predicate is taken as representing 113 in the both a Section 6 considers in natural this deals with reasoning, the common-sense of the form “if P then Q unless R”. In effect notion of unless as it is found implicit inferences is already it appears in various guises tied up with default represented by such propositions hierarchy. For many implementations, that have exceptions. This is closely in several of the works cited above. The as exceptions may be deduced via the specificity language propositions logical type of and in reasoning in the Section 5, inasmuch multiple-inheritance to make such reasoning more explicit. This can be done as follows. Agree that the label for a formula list having such as “Most Birds can fly” may contain an optional exception and exceptional two different list only as they properties are deduced for the kind of syllogisms discussed above: apply an inference to an individual only if it is not known rendition of the normal use of the word “unless”. in this manner obtains a new and intuitively (e.g., being a penguin). Entries are made (e.g., Opus) in the exception however, it may be desired to be exceptional. One in the DRS described kinds of entries: to a procedural the path. This and entered exceptional individuals semantics satisfying relation leads into logic, implicit that (i) reasoning difficulties approaches as just another that are merely to nonmonotonic can be expressed “rule of conjecture” that the path logic’s in first-order systems there are the well-known systems, where relative consistency language admit predicate variables. Then the cir- rule of inference. the four original in full or in some restricted and sense, can be reformulated within of this is that it shows how the for- the temporal aspects of nonmonotonic in the earlier studies. For predicate circumscription, Section 7 reconsiders shows how each, either framework. The significance the path-logic/DRS malisms studied here can be used to make explicit reasoning one needs only cumscriptive For default is undecidable whether a given formula and (ii) even in simpler is computationally to it forbids any direct the temporal logic that avoids these difficulties. First define a notion of local or n-ply consistency, meaning to apply free from contradiction defaults only under condition of consistency out to some reasonable n. Such a reasoning system, strategy would appropriately SO as to adequately deal with inconsistencies the in the path logic formalism by nth future step. Reason maintenance about how the formula was derived. allowing This for the sources of inconsistencies. logic can be crafted via the version of classical modalities defined is consistent with some given set of formulas, it typically appealing, features of path logics, however, one can devise a variant of default be used in conjunction with a reason maintenance in all but the very simplest of cases. By appeal to include label then be referenced is decidable, logic is intuitively intractable. Hence even though default that may later be discovered beyond the next n reasoning can be implemented steps. Then agree of nonmonotonic in backtracking, implementation A semblance for at least a formula’s information information looking can it in Section 3. Section 8 takes up the frame problem, perspective of a DRS. Here an important distinction with reasoning is pointed out about static (unchanging) that the frame problem arises only together with some of its relatives, from the is made between problems associated domains versus dynamic ones. It in the context of the latter. Thus (changing) 114 D.G. Sckwartz/Avtijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 reasoning as multiple-inheritance the frame inasmuch It is here outIined, however, how the notion of a path logic may problem does not pertain. be extended realm of dynamic domains and in this context how the frame problem and its relatives once again raise their troublesome heads, Section 9 outlines a few possible is always about static domains, to the more complicated future developments. This paper is the culmination they have undergone system, and in process and expansions. This has included through a rather lengthy series of conference of about 7 years of thinking on these various topics. articles discussing The ideas have evolved numerous bits and pieces of the overall several false starts, a few blind alleys, modifications for the system Q, appearing here and one or two outright blunders. A major modification to for the first time, is a shift from a probabilistic ). This change was one based on Bayesian subjectivist probability complexities with the former made in order to avoid certain as an alternative, however, that can approach. The earlier semantics he useful of for certain the syntax for Q, and several new topics have been added to the elaboration of the DRS. in Sections 6, 7, and 8 appear here for the first time. As such In particular, this paper is the first presentation system. of all these ideas in a single unified reasoning It is intended semantics based on relative cardinalities theory (as in f 23,132] types of applications. There has also been some simplification to supersede all prior works. is here reintroduced and mathematical the material limitations 2. A logic of qualified syllogisms 2.1. Sources and related works In this paper, thefuzzy quantifiers will include the crisp modifiers all and 110, as well as the usual@ modijers will include always the imprecise ones mentioned earlier. Similarly, include ce~a~n~y and certainly not. The and never, and the ~~ke~~~~ood rnod~~ers will like “several” and fuzzy quantiliers “around 50”, but these will not be considered here. In the literature, usuality modifiers are sometimes probabilities”. Following and likelihood modifiers as “linguistic discussed by Zadeh additionally of fuzzy quantification the initial discussion included modifiers to as “frequency adjectives”, referred in [ 1991, the subject was [ 201,202,204]. A primary such as for propositions semantics a real number [ 2061 and Zadeh are young”, where young is interpreted referred developed at length by Zadeh and Bellman aim of those works was to provide a well-defined ‘“Most students of ages. Briefly, most is computed students which are young; and the given proposition with the assertion “Zcount(young/student) Zcount(young), sets, so that the relative sigma count cardinalities yo~zg divided by the total number of students. The resulting counts winds up being a natural and straightforward is the corresponding is a generalization of crisp sets; of the notion of cardinality (non-fuzzy) of the relative it is the sigma count of the number of students which are semantics based on sigma to fuzzy sets of the generalization generalization for crisp is given as a fuzzy subset of a collection as a fuzzy subset S of the interval [0, 11; there to as the re~atj~e sigma count of the number of as being equivalent is S’. The sigma count of a fuzzy set, e.g., is interpreted D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 11s simple probability measure if one restricts the formula back the standard probability measure. that is based on relative cardinalities for the relative sigma count of crisp sets. Indeed, to only crisp sets, then one gets in modifiers [ 1411 and Stump is there represented Several of these same modifiers had been studied earlier by Mostowski [ 1 IS] under a quite different semantics: each universe. Most uncountably [ 14])- IO, and exactly 3 (see the collection by Barwise and Feferman like few, most and many only reemerging the heading of “generalized quantifiers”, but employing quantifier as a class of subsets of the underlying subsequent work in this area has focused on cardinality quantifiers-e.g., many, at least with interest Peterson Barwise and Cooper for generalized to van Benthem’s by van Benthem Mostowski’s work is Kiesler’s of the form “the probability as the probability measure of the set of individuals and Zadeh’s semantics may be found quantifiers” later. analyses of these terms, and semantics leading [ 1851, as well as the edited collections [56]. A brief comparison [ 1711. Another of in Thiele’s related [ 821. This allows for propositions in turn sparked a new flurry of activity, the broader development of Mostowski’s [ 1691 undertook philosophical that P is true about individual a, is at least Y”, by taking r about which P is true. quantifiers. The latter [ 1841 and Gardenfors theory of “probability and van Eijck’s and ter Meulen [ 131 continued two decades [ 180-1821 reasoning has been explored by Whalen and Schott [ 1881. [ 2051. Those papers additionally mention, but do not elaborate, The fuzzy sets notion of usuality was introduced by Zadeh in [204] and then contin- an apparent between usuality and quantification. Nonetheless Zadeh’s later papers clearly the same semantics. that the two concepts might be modeled by essentially logic was termed “dispositional logic” by Zadeh, in reference to the fact that to in the same way in the future. A way to employ “usually” occurs, then one is “disposed” that a certain phenomenon that it will continue in nonmonotonic likelihood was first touched upon by Zadeh to occur ued with connection suggest Usuality when one knows expect usuality Fuzzy in [ 1991, discussed at length in this likelihood modifiers as fuzzy subsets of the unit interval [ 2001, and then taken up again in [ 2031. In contrast with quantification represents the technical differences between make them unsuitable An early attempt at formulating selection of Zadeh’s key papers are reprinted approach for direct implementation these formulations such syllogisms of quantification via probability as a semantics in [ 1981. and usuality, [ 0, l] . Accordingly, versus likelihood for qualified syllogisms. theory is [ 1131. A is logically An alternative in the underlying equivalent with the conjunction is young AND etc.,” where “student-l [ 190- has been explored by Yager that the classical “for all”, as in “All is young etc. are all the the classical “there exists”, is logically equivalent with the disjunction to fuzzy quantification 1971. This semantics begins with the observation students are young”, AND student-2 students as in “There exists a student “student-l most and few as being these as operators which are weakenings of the logical OR. These operators, known as “ordered weighted averages”, or OWA operators, are shown to have many of the algebraic properties one would desire of fuzzy quantifiers. like for all and there exists, Yager represents strengthenings domain of discourse. Similarly of the logical AND and/or is young OR etc.” Taking is young OR student-2 the fuzzy quantifiers that is young”, ,” “student-2,” intermediary “student-l between 116 D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 just applied themselves interpretation to propositions of [O, I]. The authors are given as subintervals investigations by Dubois sense of Zadeh. Some preliminary [Z&30], Amarger, Epenoy, and Grihon of the probabilistic and Prade and Prade 16-81. These works mostly consider to the case of fuzzy predicates and fuzzy qu~ti~ers of fuzzy quantifiers have been [5], and the case of involving only crisp predicates, and where the to this limit the problem of inference chaining, but clearly Further undertaken Amarger, Dubois, fuzzy quantifiers quantifiers simpIer case for the purpose of studying reserve the option of gener~izing in the latter direction have in the original to answer: For appeared arbitrary quantifiers Qt, !&, given that &t A’s are B’s, and that Q2 B’s are C’s, what can be said about how many A’s might be C’s? It has been shown that, when Qt and Q2 are interpreted upper and the interval determined less precise, imprecision been put forth by Narazaki and Turksen to compute that an A will be a C. It turns out that larger, and hence that intuition ideas have than the ones started with. This correlates with the normal accumulates by these upper and lower bounds [30], however. The primary an algorithm can be applied aim of these studies was chains [ 120,121]. for the probability in length. Similar as the reasoning of probabilities, as subintervals lower bounds is normally increase efforts in Zimmer Experimental investigations [87] studied in the Psychology for regarding quantifiers the use of such modifiers of the natural human use of usuality and likelihood modi- fiers have been reported literature. Mosteller and Youtz [ 1171 summa- rize the results of 20 such studies, covering 52 different modifiers. Kuipers, Moskowitz, in decision making under uncer- and Kassirer tainty. A psychological as “fuzzy” notions has been put forth by Newstead [ 207-2101 argument [ 1231. undertook the natural human use of fuzzy quantifiers, which modifiers conforms various combinations experiments actual meanings compare with various fuzzy-sets models. These collective works emphasize usefulness of finding ways to replicate 11,2 121 of Erev, Budescu, Forsyth, Rapaport, Wallsten, and Zwick report their the use of linguistic investigating usuality modifiers, to which and disjunctions) this type of reasoning on a computer. the extent and likelihood and rules of logical combination a series of experiments In [ 20,186,187,2 (in conjunctions and the extent to the standard interpretations. the potential probabilities fuzzy-sets studying to 2.2. M~tivuti~~ The first objective is to devise a logic which successfully soning exemplified by the three syllogisms given that led to the present connection between the style of rea- insights rendition are as follows. First, it was noted that there is a natural the statement and fuzzy likelihood. To illustrate, in Section 1.2. The principal fuzzy quantification captures Most birds can fly. may be regarded as equivalent with If x is a bird, then it is likely that x can fly. The implicit connection one is asserting is provided by the notion of a statistical sampling. In each case D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Infelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 117 Given a bird randomly there is a high F~u~u~i~i~ that it will be able to fly. selected from the population of all birds, Suppose we express this equivalence as (Most x)(Bird(x) -+ CanFly( +-+ (Bird(x) + LikelyCanFly( x) ) the first of the two syllogisms involving Tweety can be reduced to an application Then of this formula, together with the following syllogism: Bird(x) Bird(Tweety) -+ LikeZyCanFly( x) ~i~e~~an~ly( Tweety ) to be made here is that the latter syllogism x with Tweety and applying ordinary the left side of the equivalence and the right side of the equivalence This follows because inal syllogism, syllogism. A key observation instantiating gests that the desired obtained merely by adjoining also suggests quantifiers or modal operators, and that the semantics on some version of probability fo~ulation classical theory. of fuzzy quantification is the first premise of the orig- is the first premise of the above follows by (classical) Modus Ponens. This sug- likelihood may be set of modifiers. It in the manner of either for such a system could be based and fuzzy that the modifiers of interest may be introduced logic with an appropriate A second observation is that there is a similar connation between the foregoing two concepts and the concept of usuality. Based on the same idea of a statistical one has that sampling, Usually, if something is a bird, then it can fly. logic. with the former foci. To wit, usuality and likelihood modifiers is not to claim, of course, that such a system would capture and nuances to their temporal as in “It has usually been the case that a randomly for these terms. In particular, an important distinction two assertions. Thus one should be able to include usu- in a similar extension of is ~uivalent ality modifiers along with quantifiers classical This meanings regard past experiences, fly”, while quantification affairs, as in “Most birds can fly”, and likelihood ‘“If at some future expectations the future, about to fly”. In the context of such distinctions, it is likely that it will be able interrelations population was true foreseeable in our perceptions the full range of arises with to in reference selected bird can the present state of to in reference then the above that the relevant state of affairs with the time. What true in the rooted is normally time I randomIy future. In effect, both quantification to remain more or less constant true now, and may be expected and likelihood are pragmatically reflect an implicit presumption throughout to remain tends to be applied only in the past, is mostly select a bird, to be applied in statements of all birds of usuality. applied about tends tends The system Q is an outgrowth of these various insights and reflections. In addition to the syllogisms illustrated in Section 1.2, it allows for expression of all similar syllogisms II8 Table I Interrelations across seven levels of the three kinds of modifiers ~uallti~cation a11 almost all most rr~any/about half few/some almost no no Usuality alWayS almost always usually frequently/o~en occasionaIiy/seIdom almost never/rarely never Likelihood certainly almost certainly likely unce~in/about 50-W unfikely almost certainly not certainly not increase I (where of distinction (or decrease) (or removing) the granularity by the tines of Table lines. For example, between insert Yer)l mnn~, very often, vet Table 1 is meant only for illustrative purposes and could be modified as represented the third line, and the “Felix” example insert very few, verq’ seldom, very unlikely. What natural-language slots may also be at issue, partly because the two “Tweety” examples are given by is given by first and last entry of the sixth line). in various ways. between the second and third lines the fifth terms is in some the case that the same as the standpoint of the formalism presented below, the labels one puts in the however. which play no official role in in principle to and “normally”, which 1)) could here (Section In particular, one could levels by adding one might and sixth lines one puts cases no completely it is not necessarily many should be taken as synonymous with about half, or that few means soiree. From various cells reflect a higher-level deductions. For the sake of perspicuity at least some version of common appear frequently be taken as synonyms they of course should sense. The terms “typically” reasoning likely, and in parallel between in the literature on nonmonotonic choice. For example, in the various inte~retation, for trsually. appropriate conform there 2.3. Languages left-right to be employed. Let the kind of languages then We shall begin by defining in Table 1, in top-down the mod- by Q3, . . . , Q-3, ifiers ~23,. . . ,Li--3, 123,. _ . , C-3. As ~y~nbols select: an (~~dividufll) variable, denoted by x; infinitely many (individual) constunts, denoted generically by a, b, . . .; count- countably by (Y, p, . . .; seven ably logical connectives, denoted by -1, V, A, +, -4, 1, and V; the abovementioned modifiers Qi, Z&, and C;; and parentheses and comma, denoted as usual. Let the formulas be the members of the sets infinitely many unary predicate symbols, denoted generically order, be represented 6 = {a(x) / (Y is a predicate symbol), h=fi U{+XPVQ>,(PAQ) IRQEF$JF~},* 2 This notation abbreviates the usual inductive definition, in this case the smallest class of formulas containing FL together with all formulas that can be built up from formulas in 4 in the three prescribed ways. D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 119 Fx={(f’--+ Q) / EQ E F& FJ={CII(Pic;Q),C3tP~QQ)lc~(P;uiQ), e3(P~~,c,Q),e?<P;eiQ),e~(PiUiQ), &(P ACiQ)t&,(P -A QiQ>t%(P A&Q) /P,QE F2UFj.i=-3 ,..., 3}, Fs={CiP,QiP,UiP 1 P,Q E F2UF3, i=-3,...,3}. F6=F4UF5U{=P,(P~Q) /P,QEF'uF~UF~}, F,' = (P(a/x) j P E Fj and a is an individual constant), F2/ = {P( n/x) 1 P E F2 and n is an individual constant}, F; = {P( n/x) 1 P E F3 and n is an individual constant}, Fi = (Ln f P i .CiQ) (a/x) / C3 ( P 4 CiQ) E Fd and a is an individual constant}, F[ = {C;P(n/x) 1 P E Fsq n is an individual constant, and i = -3,. . . .3}, F;=F$J(+E(PiiQ) / EQ E y;uF;), where P(a/x) the formula obtained the variable x with an occurrence of the constant n. As abbreviations denotes from P by replacing every occurrence of take (PAQ) for I;(qPD+Q) (P-Q) for f?P’?Q> (PAQ) for ((PGQ)ii(QGP)) is as- the intended grouping Parentheses may be dropped when to be to the right. Formulas without modifiers are first- or lower-level formulas, sumed and those with modifiers are second- or upper-lever. The members of the set FI U F: formulas, and the members of F4 U Fi U F5 U Fi are are elementar)l$rst- or lower-level elementary second- or upper-level formulas. A formula the variable x, and closed if not. is open if it contains is clear; associativity for these definitions to a closed formula, a likelihood modifier By a language L is meant any collection of symbols and formulas as described above. is as follows. A formula of the form Ct P( u/x), Part of the rationale to express “It is likely is intended applying the proposition P”, and a formula of the form Ct P, where that the individual P is open, expresses individual X, it is likely that x satisfies P”. A formula of the form &?t P, P open, expresses “For most x, P is true about 2’; similarly, language does not allow L4r P, P open, expresses ~‘Us~l~li~ P is true about a?. The these the intuitively meaningless it along with languages provide only one individual variable, application of Q’s and U’s to closed formulas. Since there is no need to identify “For an arbitrary a satisfies I20 D.G. Schwarrz./Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 the modifier, e.g., as in (Fb~~Most x)P; When expressing propositions make the x explicit. in other words, when P is open, the x is implicit. informally, however, it will sometimes be convenient to In applying both to open and to closed formulas, likehhood behaves somewhat akin and usuality apply only to open formulas, and the convention to a modality. By contrast, quantification thus behave as ordinary quantification. formula, level, one writes C3 P (informally, CertuinlyP) of the foregoing definitions of the formal semantics (Section 2.4). formula P is a lower-level is adopted that, in order to assert the proposition P at the second Since a modifier-free . Further discussion of the idiosyncrasies is best taken up in the context of the following presentation Languages differ and predicate from one another essentially symbols. As an example, only in the first of the foregoing their choice of individual syllogisms in a language employing the individual symbols LY and p for Bird and CanFly-and constant a for Tweety and the these names for clarity writing constants can be written predicate instead of the symbols-as &(Bird(x) -+ CanFly( &Bird{ Tweety ) In words: For most x, if x is a Bird then x’ CanFly; it is likely that Tweety CanFly. therefore it is certain that Tweety is a Bird; 2.4. The Bayesian semantics semantics two alternative This section and the next define one non-Bayesian. for certain kinds of applications. will consist of a likelihood mapping 11 which associates each lower-level a number with a truth value, T or F. The subscript is clear. for Q, one Bayesian and The first will be the more general, but the second will be more useful an interpretation Z for a language L formula with formula I will be dropped when the intended meaning in [ 0, 11, and a truth valuation vI which associates each upper-level In both semantics, Here the definition of 1 is based on the Bayesian in [ 132, pp. 29-341. A key feature of Bayesian subjectivist theory of probability as described notion of conditional pretation P of L, and elementary P, probability the ordered pairs I of a language L, will be any function defined on the lower-level is that it takes the as primitive. A likelihood mapping 1, for an inter- formulas for formulas of L, satisfying: of lower-level theory (QlP) l(P) E ro, 11 for ordered pairs (Ql P) of formulas (elementary or not), I(QIP) E IO,11 and, for any P and Q (elementary of not), D.G. Sclzwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 121 I(lP) = 1 -Z(P) l(P A Q, = f(QlP)l(f') I(PVQ) =I(P)+l<Q, -l(PAQ, I(f’ --f Q) = l(Qlf’) if 1(P) = r, then for any a, I(P(a/x)) =l(plQ)l(Q) l(QlJ')l(p) = r the assumption of the familiar this interpretation that Q is known the truth) of P under to be the Bayesian (in should be undefined. The last of the above equations is here taken to be the Bayesian degree of belief (in the truth) of P. The conditional probability, which by definition (to sense would dictate is that that, if a formula P then in the absence of a, the formula P (a/x) will be held to the The value Z(P) value I( Ql P) is taken is the degree of belief be true) with absolute certainty. Under that, if I(P) = 0, then 1( QlP) a reconstrual “inversion A and V are commutative. The second involving any special same degree. The issue of how to deal with the possibility of there being countervailing information thing certainty” will be represented by the value 1. of Sections 4 and 5. The only is to agree that “absolute formula” (see from the last line asserts the variable x is held with a certain degree of belief, left to make any such 1 a Bayesian probability about a plays a key role in the developments [ 132, p. 321) and ensures about an individual information common function The “triviality In the present context foregoing result” established by Lewis this may be summarized languages were expanded to allow [93] was mentioned as follows: if the lower for nesting of conditionals, in Section 1.1. level of the e.g., as in I( P --f Q) as ----) R) ), then the foregoing semantics based on defining could have at most 4 distinct compelling idea of interpreting likelihood values. This inherent the logical conditional limitation as conditional is the reason for defining conditional while avoiding the formula class F3 as in Section 2.3; it admits a that the nesting of simply by ensuring triviality (Q (P + equal to Z(QlP) in the otherwise probability probabilistic such conditionals To define the valuation mapping u, one must first select, for each i = -3,. . . ,3, a likelihood interval pi C [ 0, 1 ] in the manner of Lj = [ 1, 1 ] (singleton 1) , L2 = [$, I), LI = c&g, Lo=($,$), $1, L-1 = t;, L-2 = u+l, L-3 = [O,O] (singleton 0). intervals These is largely arbitrary, but should then become associated with the corresponding modifiers. Their choice in principle be guided either by intuition or experimental is disallowed. 122 D.G. Schwartz,/Artij?cinl Intelligence 93 (I 997) 103-167 (e.g., based on psychological results formal requirement such a set of intervals, lower-level P, Q, and with M being any of C, Q, or U, is that they be nonoverlapping studies of the kind cited in Section 2.1). The only [O, 11. Given and cover the interval . . ,3: for open the mapping u is defined by, for all i = -3,. c(M3(PiMiQ) =T iff I(P + Q) E Li for closed lower-level P and Q, u(C,(PALiQ)) =T iff l(P + Q) E L; for open lower-level P and M being any of C, e, or U, u(MiP) = T iff l(P) E pi for closed lower-level P, U(CiP) = T iff 1(P) E pi and for open or closed upper-level P and Q, u(+P) =T iff u(P) = F u(P’;iQ) =T iff either u(P) =T or u(Q) =T to verify that this provides a well-defined formula semantics in is either T or F, so that this part of the system that is customary for the languages in the manner introducing A, A, and A i.e., via the abbreviations convenient in Section 2.3. By contrast, at the given syntactical way to express is no similarly the definition in terms of I( P A Q), so that there the two connectives must be defined It is not difficult concern. Note that a second-level is classical. This justifies for classical level lower of I( P V Q) separately. logic, there Note also that these languages rule out compound modifiers such as likely likely and to the simpler case. the discussion Pearl for most x, likely. This was done in order to confine Such could be introduced, however, by extending of probabilities. do this, and that approach could be applied here to provide Such modifier combinations great loss to leave them out. this semantics, [ 132, pp. 357-3721 To illustrate to a semantics employing probabilities explains a sense in which it is meaningful to the needed interpretations. rarely occur in everyday discourse, however, so it is not a let us verify in detail that the foregoing syllogism regarding I, i.e. that if the premises of the syllogism is valid in any such interpretation Tweety are both T in I, then so also will be the conclusion. this example likelihood interval. Suppose I is such that in is a direct result of associating &i (most) and Ci (likely) with the same It will be seen that validity u( Qi (Bird(x) 4 CanFly( = T u (CsBird( Tweety ) ) = T From the latter we obtain by definition of u that I(Bird(Tweety)) = 1 D.G. Sclwurtz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-I 67 123 which means definition of u that that Bird(Tweety) is absolutely certain. From the former we obtain by I(Bird(x) - CanFly( E ~~ By definition of 1, this gives I(Bird(Tweety) -+ CanFly(Tweety)) E ~1 whence I(CanFly(Tweety) IBird(Tweety)) E LI In accordance with Bayesian Fly(Tweety), with the above certainty CanFly(Tweety) given theory, the latter means is absolutely that the degree of belief is in ~1. This, certain, that Bird(Tweety) about Tweety being a bird, yields that the degree of belief in Can- together in must also be in pi. Then, by definition of 1, I(CanFly(Tweety)) E LI giving, by definition of V, that u(LtCanFly(Tweety)) = T This is what we were required to show. it is a direct consequence In general, of the definition validates classical Modus Ponens at the upper level, namely of o is that the semantics P’;Q P Q for all P, Q E F6 U F& and it is a direct consequence the semantics validates the Substitution Rule of the definitions of 1 and u that P P(alx) for all P E F6 involving only L’s (i.e., no Q’s or U’s). A second-level It is routine to verify classical propositional valid for all choices of i (and open P): proposition P will be valid if u(P) = T for all such interpretations that all second-level formulas having calculus are valid. It is also easy to verify that the following I. the form of tautologies of are LiP +G Q,P CcP &UiP &,P Azd;P 124 D.G. SchwartzJArtijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 The need for the single-dotted in F4, arose from a desire to express certain propositions which could not otherwise be stated. For example, suppose one wishes the equivalence described in Section 2.2 as conditional to express introduced informally i, (Most ~)(Bird(x) -+ CanFly( H (Bird(x) + LikelyCanFly( x) ) The first 4 would naturally be here represented would naturally be transcribed be no way to transcribe i general, are interpreted the semantics validates all formulas having at the syntactic equivalently, formally as the undotted +, and the H there would the formal 4, level, -+ and roles. In they play very distinct level the forms (for open P and Q): the second +. Thus even though at the semantic as the formal H, but without Collectively, likelihood, these express salient aspects of the interrelations between quantification, and usuality. Another general form validated by this semantics is This is established by: u(Qi(P 4 Q)) =T iff Z(P + Q) E L; (definition of v) iff Z(QlP) E L; (definition of I) iff iff l(P) = 1 implies l(Q) E L; (Bayes conditional) c(Cs(P)) = T implies U(LiQ) = T (definition of u) iff U( CsP -IL1 LiQ) = T (classical propositional calculus) One also has that negations behave we have in intuitively plausible ways. In particular, for all i, C,P tli CiY7P LiP cli L_i7P (similarly for &?‘s and U’s), and where jr,. . . , j, are the subscripts # i, I;cip cli c.i, p v. . . Ti CjhP The first of these expresses second expresses not, and by taking that in the same schema, with & in place of C, we take i = -3. This gives i = 2, the that likely is equivalent with unlikely i = -2, one has that unlikely is equivalent with likely not. Suppose the usual property of double negations. By taking the common-sense proposition (ForNo x)PA(ForAll X)TP D.G. Schwartz/Art&id Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 125 from which it follows by propositional calculus that Y(ForNo x)P Gl;(ForAll X)TP Now suppose we introduce we have (ForSome x) P as an abbreviation for ‘( ForNo x) P. Then (ForSome x) P C+ ‘( ForAll x) 7P revealing ForSome and ForAll as probabilistic seems intuitively and (ForSome x) P is true iff the probability of P is not 0. analogs of the classical 3 and V. This inasmuch as (ForAll x) P is true iff the probability of P is 1, correct, The latter of the above three schemata conforms with ordinary intuition at the sec- (classical) ond which do not hold in the present both of level. There are, however, various propositions formalism. For example, even though one can express related common-sense ?Likely P C+ Unlikely P (ForAll x) P -t( ForMost x) P neither of these are valid. It seems reasonable introducing this has not yet been explored. that one could obtain such expressions by alternative versions of likely and most, e.g., a Likely2 and a ForMost2, but The daunting task of establishing a semantically complete axiomatization for Q also in this paper, it is not actually incom- In particular, one for systems discussed though having an axiomatization would be desirable, in spite of the system’s being rules will surely be useful. has yet to be attempted. For purposes of the reasoning however, even required. One can still perform effective reasoning plete. Nevertheless, additional likely want would inferences chaining to adjoin involving inference the rules developed by Amarger et al. (Section 2.1) fuzzy quantifiers. to employ only one individual variable was made The decision to the simplest case. Having now developed the extend in its present in the sections the analysis not be difficult predicates. Even become evident and may well in itself world expert systems go little beyond ordinary propositional are never applied form, however, that follow, to more than one individual to the use of multiple variables in order to confine case, it should and nary is not without utility. As will it already provides a fairly rich semantics, Indeed virtually all real- calculus, and in any case lead to a new class of expert systems. the one-variable this treatment the system at a time. 2.5. The counting semantics Whenever one uses a quantifier in everyday conversation, to an underlying for Zadeh’s original “Most birds can fly” refers to a domain of individuals which collection of birds, and an assertion domain of discourse. This observation of fuzzy quantification formulation to the effect that there is a “high probability” is presumed to include a that there is an implicit reference served as the basis evidently (Section 2.1). For example, 126 D.G. Schwurtz/Arti$cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 a randomly by the condition Unfortunately, chosen bird will be able to fly (Section 2.2) is represented mathematically that a “large proportion” of birds are able to fly. the semantics developed in the preceding as degrees of belief, however, type of meaning. While Bayesian probabilities intuitions degrees of belief are to be determined; laws. way that they conform to certain discussed earlier. Indeed theory insists on a purely subjectivist there is nothing the theory does not say anything interpretation section does not reflect this of that rules out the statistical about how one’s in such a it says only that they must be chosen The present section develops an alternative domain. This counting semantics semantics which explicitly portrays the arises by restricting Zadeh’s role of the underlying notion of “cT-count” An interpretation (see Section 2.1) . to crisp predicates I for a language L will now consist of: a universe U, of individuals individual al E U, to each individual of a unique unary predicate CY~ on U, to each predicate formula with formula I will be dropped when the intended (here assume U, is finite) ; assignment of a unique constant a of L; assignment symbol LY of L; a likelihood mapping 1, which associates each lower-level a number with a truth value, T or F. As before, the subscript meaning in [ 0, 1 ] ; and a truth valuation UI which associates each upper-level is clear. Given assignments 1 and L' are defined the assignment ing to for the individual in the following way. Observe constants and predicate symbols, that the assignments formula the mappings LYI induce in F2 accord- of a unique subset PI of U, to each (open) (,P)/ = (8)’ (PVQ)I=P/‘JQJ (PAQ>/=P/nQr For subsets X C: U, define a proportional size cr by 4X) = IXlllUl where 1 I denotes cardinality. Then 1 is defined by: for P E F2, l(P) = 4P/) for (P + Q) E F3, l(P + Q, = dp/ f- Q,)/dp~) with 1 undefined if (T( P,) = 0; and for P E F2 U F3, if l(P) = r, then l(P(a/x)) = r to see that c It is easy the standard way of defining probability where events are represented universe of alternative possibilities. The value a( P,) is defined a randomly selected a, in U, will be in PI. This means as subsets of a that to be the probability that, for each a and each open function. These definitions merely is a probability replicate D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 127 information P E F2, and given no additional al E P,. The definition of l(P 4 Q) is the traditional conditional (see this ratio is, by definition, to be in P,. a, is known this version of 1, the corresponding Assuming in terms of joint events the probability probability ) is the probability about a, I( P (a/x) that (non-Bayesian) way of defining [ 132, p. 311). Thus the value of that an individual al will be in Q,, given that v is defined exactly as in Section 2.4. It is a routine matter to verify and formulas as were considered are necessarily two semantics L, an issue which as yet remains unresolved.) established denote probability, we have as follows. As before, assume that this semantics validates all the same syllogisms in Section 2.4. (This equivalent with respect is not to say, however, to the given class of languages that the To illustrate, is that both premises have .value T. Letting Pr the “Tweety” syllogism u(&ii(Bird(x) -+CanFly(x)) =T iff 1(Bird(x) + CanFly( E ~1 (definition of ~1) iff a(Bird, n CanFlyl) E ~1 (definition of I) iff Vu,, Pr( a, E Bird,) = 1 implies Pr( a, E CanFly) E pi (non-Bayes cond.) iff Vu, I( Bird( a) ) = 1 implies I( CanFly (a) ) E L, (discussion above) iff Vu, v(LsBird(a)) = T implies v(fZiCanFly(a)) = T (definition of v) the last line with Tweety as an instance of a and combining taking Then second premise of the syllogism gives the desired Section 2.4 may be dealt with by similar techniques. result. The other items validated this with the in to define instead of basing It would be easy that satisfy certain relations. For example, the numbers of objects (e.g., many expert systems), to count in any database; one need only In other types of applications, the likelihood valuation 1 on actual counts, it in terms of estimates of sizes of populations. the underlying universe will be such that it is not it there are in the world, nor how many of them it would Such they might alternatively, educated guesses, not necessarily such a mapping u to implement scan records and perform counts wherever appropriate. however possible is not known exactly how many birds can fly. Hence be more reasonable estimates might be arrived at by means of statistical samplings; be subjective estimates of relative based on any deeper methodology. type of reasoning portrayed by the Bayesian nonetheless used to help ensure example, A’s should be a subset of the set of B’s. Such an approach might be characterized subjective, but non-Bayesian. to the semantics would as the principles of set theory can be plausible ways. For the set of as to always be B’s, then in any valid interpretation that these estimates are selected semantics. The counting In the latter case one if A’s are known sizes, essentially in this context, in intuitively is nearing be useful inasmuch a return The restriction to finite universes was made in order to define the counting It seems reasonable semantics that one could extend to infinite do- formulation of probability, as in Kolomogorov’s in terms of relative cardinalities. mains via an abstract measure-theoretic treatise [ 841. 128 D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 3. The classical modalities (see them include studied variety. reference theory and to distinguish [ 170,179,183]. [ 85,861. Under this interpretation, the classical modalities [ 1511. There a semantics (V(P), Pr( P) ), where V(P) is [ 801; more recent summaries and surveys in those works are here termed “classical” probabilistic between probability The modern study of the modalities possibly and necessarily began in the 1920’s with literature, introduced if it is true if it is true in at least one possible world. A the works of C.I. Lewis [92] ). This eventually grew into an extensive with the majority of studies being based on the “possible worlds” semantics by Kripke a proposition P is “necessary” in all possible worlds, and is “possible” standard The modalities from the lesser-known has been The connection is presented wherein propositions P explored by Rescher truth value is the ordinary have two-place “truth values”, of P ( 1 for true and 0 for false), and Pr( P) is the probability of P’s being true. The two that, if Pr( P) = 1, items are regarded as independent then V(P) must be 1, and if Pr( P) = 0, then V(P) = 0. A proposition of the form I if Pr( P) = 1, and 0 if not. A Nec( P) the V-value 0 if Pr( P) = 0, proposition of the form Pos( P) (P is possible) and 1 if not. The Pr-values of Nec( P) and Pos( P) are defined to be the same as their V-values. Thus P is necessary is not 0. Based on these showed and logic S5. As has become customary, necessity will be denoted by 0 and possibility by 0. There these the system Q to accommodate of to the symbol set, and formally formulas, or (ii) employ 0 and 0 as to are two options modifiers: the form q IP and OP into the set of allowable a means of abbreviating adopt the latter approach. Let us take iff its probability ideas, Rescher defined are just the theorems of the well-known modal for extending (i) add 0 and 0 forms. It will be more convenient of one another, with the exception the notion of an “M-tautology” formulas having certain is 1, and P is possible introduce propositions that the M-tautologies iff its probability the V-value is necessav) is assigned expressions is assigned involving (P CIP for L3P UP for x-jP It is easily verified that u(OP) =T iff I(P) = 1 o( OP) = T iff l(P) > 0 Thus these definitions are in accordance with the same intuitions The present aim is to determine the extent to which these versions of possibility necessity satisfy the same properties as the versions encoded by the well-known K, S4, and S5 (the formulations used here are from van Benthem’s monograph The language collection PL = {P’, P”, . for these systems uses the connectives .} of propositional 1, 4, 0, and 0, letters, and consists of the set of formulas as motivated Rescher. and systems [ 1831). together with a F =PLu (18 (P +Q),WOP]P,QEPLUF} D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 129 For system K, the axioms are (i) all formulas having of the form (ii) all “definitions” the form of classical tautologies, and (iii) all formulas of the form q (P -+ Q) + (UP + q Q) The inference S4 is obtained q P -+ q OP. S5 is obtained Section 2.4 mentioned rules are Modus Ponens and Necessitation from K by adjoining the axioms from S4 by adjoining schemata (vi) OOP + P. (from P infer UP). System (iv) q P -+ P and (v) tautologies of Q are valid. This verifies item (i). The analog of item (ii) that all propositional is A detailed proof of validity for formulas having this form is as follows. u(qO7P) = T iff v(X37P) = T (definition of 0) iff u(L~3lP) = F (definition of u) iff I(-P) @ ~3 (definition of L’) iff l(-P) # 1 (definition of ~3) iff 1 - l(P) # 1 (definition of I) iff Z(P) f 0 iff Z(P) 6 ~-3 (definition of ~-3) iff u(C-3P) = F (definition of U) iff u(X_sP) = T (definition of u) iff u( OP) = T (definition of 0) In the same manner one may establish validity for clp C+ ‘;07p The analog of axiom form (iii) is q (P 4 Q) A(oPAnQ) the validity of which can also be established using methods similar to the above. In Section 2.4 it was noted that Modus Ponens is valid for Q. Necessitation form stated above would not be meaningful truth values. However, alone is simply may be captured for Q, since first-level sense of a propositional (the truth of) P, and (as also discussed in Q by the formula the conventional to assert in the formulas do not have variable P standing this in Section 2.4) 130 D.G. Schn~l(lrtl/Art~ci(11 Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 expressing “CertainlyP”. Building on this one has, by the definitions, validity for L3P QP the same rationale, an analog for axiom (iv) would be UP A&P, which is also Using valid. Thus we have captured all of K and most of S4. Unfortunately, in Q. This (v) and (vi) are expressible compound modifiers discussed not severe. Propositions almost never arise in everyday seldom be missed. Note nonetheless previously, to a semantics more complex propositions like “necessarily reasoning, accommodating in Section 2.4, it may be argued no analogs of axioms is clearly a limitation, but similarly as for the is necessarily P” or “possibly necessarily P” them would and hence a capacity in the manner discussed then even these that this drawback of probabilities, probabilities to express that if Q were expanded could also be expressed. Last note that the present formulation systems. in the classical In particular, we have allows for propositions that cannot be expressed interrelate necessity and possibility with quantification. Also, where ForSome is which as defined in Section 2.4. we have (ForSome x) P cli OP which expresses the intuitive relationship between 0 and 3. 4. Path logics The motivation and main ideas underlying the notion of a path logic were discussed (Most x>Bird(x) that the path be allowed it is necessary not only the language. For example, -+ CanFly include predicate symbols in Section 1. As was mentioned, grow over time, but also so should to receive the proposition necessary doesn’t, be added, e.g., some new rules for modifier combination. Accordingly as a sequence of triples be focalized time steps in which they are formed. to in order for a path logic it is if it rules a path logic will (language, path, rule set) indexed by the discrete from an external source, for Bird and CanFly. Hence these must be added. In addition to allow that inference that the language it will be useful The general notion of path logic is intended languages that may be employed both the kinds may be modified. For example, one might start out with a first-order at some point add modal operators, and at later point To illustrate languages defined the key ideas, however, in Section 2.3. if will be enough introduce to consider only second-order to be completely unrestricted and the ways in which language, regarding the language then features. the kinds of D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 I.71 Let a labeled formula be a pair (P, A), where P is a second-level in Section 2.3, and h is the label. In this section, h will be a 4-tuple i is an index, fr is a from items will be described nonnegative in detail below; here only note that the index list, to is a to list, and s is a status integer. Further formula as defined to, s), where (i,fr, indicator. Each of these i will always be a items will be added to the label in Sections 6 and 7. By a language L is now meant a set of labeled formulas. Precisely, in a language as defined is a formula of the corresponding assume second-level Inference that languages include all formulas of the form in Section 2.3, and A is any admissible language of the present if P is a formula label for P, then (P, A) type. In addition, we shall is a special forfalsehood. Let n denote the class of all such languages. (second-level) In effect, stating how labeled formulas having formulas having certain other forms. As in 4 would be the following versions of from to all languages (I, A), where I formulas. labeled symbol standing rules are now defined only on labeled into themselves, from languages rules are mappings certain examples, Modus Ponens and the Substitution Rule: for all second-level P and Q, forms may be derived two rules applicable (P-it Ah) cc A’) (Q, A”) where it is understood and for second-level P involving only C’s, that the index in A” must be larger than the indices in A and A’, tPtdx>, A’) where be the class of all inference the index of the conclusion must be larger than the index of the premise. Let @ (L,_r in A. symbols, constants , n,,_l, &_I (and possibly no) new individual and predicate from ~#+_l by possibly adding some new inference rules definable on the languages A path logic L bused on n and @ consists of a series of triples (Li, 7~,, &> generated and no in the following way. Let La be the language with no individual let ~0 be the empty sequence, and let 40 be the empty set. Assume predicate ) , for n 3 1. Suppose 7~,_.i is the sequence of labeled one has formed (PI, Al ), . . . , ( P,_I , A,,_1 ) . The language L, is formed from _&,._I by adding formulas symbols. The finitely many rules defined rule set 4,, is formed on L,. The path z-,, is formed by adding a new labeled (P,,, A,,) to the path n-,,_ 1, where P,, is either (i) arbitrarily chosen from L,, i.e., is received from an external source, or (ii) derived from formulas with the proviso s are set to on. The index position {ret}. then fr = {cp, il, by adding for P, is initially . . , &}. Also in this case, the to-list for each of the Pi, is augmented rule in c#,,, indicators the formula’s is simply from formulas Pi, , . . . , Pi,, by applying in n-,-t by application of an inference In case P,, was received from without, IZ. The to-list for P,, is temporarily can only be used as premises empty. The status indicator In case P,, was derived i in label A,, is just in the sequence. if their status the from-listfr that formulas II, indicating the integer the integer set to on. constants inference formula rule cp, s 132 D.G. Schwartz/Ar@cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 The from-lists and to-lists allow one to trace through all derivations, either backwards or forwards, and are intended (see Sections 1, 5, and 7.4). A way in which these may be used in the context of modifier combination the general use of labeled formulas appear to be used for various forms of reason maintenance is discussed below. Examples in Section 5. illustrating In an implementation, it might be convenient allow also for adding formula involving example, (P A( Q i P) ). The schemata would be used in conjunction with a rule providing schema the variables Ai, which are taken as ranging over all possible (Al G( A2 * AI ) ) is a schema representing to . . , A,,) be a schema formulas. For the general fom of all formulas for to the path. Let S(Al,. the above definitions instantiation: to expand schemata (SCPI,... ,P,,/AI,...,&),A) for any formulas PI,. for the axioms of classical propositional derive axiom from without. individual axioms as they are desired, . . , P,,. A typical use would be to initialize a path with schemata calculus. Then thus avoiding the rule could be applied to the need to input each such defined The notions of interpretation in Sections 2.4 and 2.5 may be extended into [ 0, 11, and with the part of the definition formulas removed. This means to in the following manner. Let I be defined as before, but now from labeled regarding substitution path logics first-level instances the likelihood of a formula P and that of its instances P( a/x). Let u be a valuation mapping in terms of 1 exactly as before, with for labeled the added provision that the truth of an instance CiP(a/x) is no longer dependent on the truth of CiP. that, for all A, u( I, h) = F. It follows that there is now no intrinsic that is defined second-level connection formulas between to assume Let I be an interpretation that its truth value is T. Then for a path logic L. When a formula it is automatic that there will be occasion into the path, if all the rules being applied are it is natural in the path will be true. It turns out, truth-preserving, however, to be derived from true premises. A specific example appearing below is the rule for combining Certainly and with CertainlyNot. this decision (CsP, A) and (C-3P’, A) one may infer (I, A”). to regard this combination the from to allow rules which permit It was here decided that all the formulas in a rule saying is made formal as contradictory, is received I A rule application in L will be valid with respect to I if the conclusion in that in the manner that the rule applications of path in generating is correct, and similarly this path are correct. It follows is T. Let us say that a sequence of formulas 7r generated application of the foregoing definition involved that a rule application may be correct, but invalid. Let us say that a path is valid in I if all its formulas whose status indicators is that one the path will remain interpretation, wants always that, with respect to a certain motivating is detected by the appearance of valid. Thus, whenever a correct but invalid inference a I, in the which this signals an invalidity which must somehow be eradicated. Possible ways are OIZ are true in I. The intention this might be done are (i) the contradiction these definitions by switching underlying simply ignore D.G. SchwartzJArtijkial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 133 Table 2 Sample rules for combining likelihood modifiers 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 * 2 3 2 2 2 2 0 -3 I 3 2 1 I 0 -2 -3 0 3 2 I 0 -I -2 -3 -1 -2 3 2 0 -I -I -2 -3 3 0 -2 -2 -2 -2 -3 -3 * -3 -3 -3 -3 -3 -3 3 2 I 0 -1 -2 -3 invoke a Doyle-like to 08, (ii) through from-lists then switch off the status indicators of all formulas form of reason to uncover one or more offending from the derived from to-lists just switched off, switching off all formulas which were derived as their or (iii) similarly as in (ii) except instead of switching all formulas off, the is in Section 5. How best to deal with contradictions just revise their likelihood modifiers. A concrete example appears regarding and finally work forward in general through (I, h) for future works. issue of modifier (e.g., work backwards indicator of the derived status maintenance earlier propositions, falsehood back to the chosen culprit(s), all formulas consequences), possibly Nixon Diamond puzzle reserved The situation at another point one has derived CjP, and says how one might combine some meaningful manner arbitrary, since there is no established methodology must plausible corresponding the number 1 (third) rule is akin is where, at some point row and the number k is the entry is described combination in concern such rules these to deduce a formula CkP, where Lk is derived from Ci and L,i. How one might go about it is desired combination. to that of evidence The in a path, one has derived Lip, and a rule which in this is somewhat for this kind of reasoning; here one to introduce in Table 2. This is read: given i and j as above, in the ith row and jth column. For example, - 1 (fifth) column of the table describes the the entry 0 in the rely on one’s own sense of what seems reasonable. A collection of intuitively Ll(P,A) c-1 (p, A’) Lo(P, A”) indicate which say that if P is both likely and unlikely, then P is uncertain. The “*” in the upper situation where P is both certainly right and lower left corners the contradictory above, having a and certainly not the case. This represents a rule of the kind mentioned that the status conclusion to o& indicators of the premises, Recall from the definition of path logic that the status of the rule’s conclusion is always initially 012. This ensures information will be used in future that only the more current derivations. of the form (I, A”). In applying any such rule it is required i.e., where they appear in the path, must be changed 134 D.G. Schwurtz/Artijcial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 All applications will be valid with respect where ,& is derived l(ck, A”) is of rules portrayed in Table 2, excepting falsehood, the two yielding I whose likelihood mapping 1 satisfies: from C, and L,j, if l(Li, A) = ri and l(Lj, A’) = r,,, then rk = to any interpretation undefined, if(ri=landr,j=O)or(r,,=landr;=O) 1, 0, if (ri = 1 and r,, # 0) or (ri = 1 and r; # 0) if(ri=Oandr.j# l)or(r,=Oandri# 1) max]ri, rjl, if ri, Y,j 3 0 min[ ri, rj], if ri, ‘j < 0 (ri + r,j) /2, otherwise The intuition underlying exactly, except for the contradictory dominates then the value closest partly confirming the combination; this scheme is that the values 1 and 0 should be dominant. More if either value is 1 or 0, then that value situations, if both lean toward 1 or both toward 0 (relative to l/2), to that extremity dominates; otherwise the values are regarded as and partly disconfirming, and so serve to cancel each other out. schemes Alternatively [ 199,200,203]. The above combination the fuzzy sets interpretation scheme evinces a measure of common-sense equally plausible of rules based on Zadeh of psychological ticular combination schemes will be more appropriate is intended only to lay down a general methodology nation another. appeal, but other can surely be devised. For example, one could use a set by to base the rules on the results the choice of a par- and different In any case, the foregoing for defining such modifier combi- set of rules should be preferred over studies of the kind cited in Section 2.1. Clearly, rules, and not to argue that any particular scheme will be at least partially for different applications. proposed originally context-dependent, one might want of likelihood 5. Dynamic reasoning systems As described in Section 1, reasoning the discovery of new causes one to go back and retract old conclusions. To illustrate, suppose we is nonmonotonic when that Opus is a bird, where it is known that Opus can fly. But next suppose we are given information are given conclude that Opus is a penguin, where it is known that they cannot fly. Now we are compelled about Opus’ flying ability, and affirm instead that he cannot. that birds can fly; then we naturally information the additional among birds in are exceptional that penguins to go back and retract the former conclusion indicated The earlier discussion reasoning already enjoys a history that nonmonotonic covering more than a quarter of a century and that it has grown into a complex and mul- is to lay out a method for formalizing tifaceted a particular variety of nonmonotonicity, that which arises in inheritance-based default types of nonmonotonic field of research. The aim in this section namely, reasoning. An outline of how these same methods may be extended in Section 9. reasoning appears to other D.G. SchwartzJArtiJcial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 135 Let the foregoing notion of a language L now be expanded kinds. In addition, between predicates that predi- properties predicate index, the use of which will be explained below. a kind versus a should be treated as representing to allow representing that property-type allow cate symbols are typed so as to distinguish of things and those representing symbols may be assigned an integer as to when a predicate The decision property but also at least partially context-dependent. his or her own measure of common typing has the important advantage afllicting earlier multiple-inheritance pear shortly illustrating respectively, by superscripts A multiple-inheritance ( k) and (p) . is left to the system’s user. This distinction will often be somewhat arbitrary, to intervene with predicate that when it is used properly, many of the anomalies The user is thus required sense. This shortcoming notwithstanding, systems can be avoided. Several examples will ap- these facts. Kind and property predicate symbols are indicated, as ordered pairs of nodes. Nodes may be either hierarchy ZJ will consist of a set of nodes, together with a set individual nodes, node, kind node) will be link; one of the form (kind node, kind node) will be a subset-of link; and node, property node) or of the form (kind node, property link. There will be no other types of links. An individual of links represented kind nodes, or property nodes. A link of the form (individual an element-of one of the form (individual node) will be a property-of node may enter into element-of node may enter into subset-of as this will not create individual property nodes will be labeled with property-type Subset-of as appropriate. links with any number of different kind nodes. A kind as long links with any number of other kind-nodes, nodes will be labeled with constants, kinds nodes will be labeled with kind-type predicate symbols, and indices. predicate links will be labeled with quantifiers or likelihood modifiers In the following, symbols bearing and property-of individual loops. link or a subset-of specific and minimally general. It also follows link, then node, >$ nodez, and (ii) Given such a v, there is defined on the individual nodes and the kind nodes a speci$city to: (i) if (nodet, nodez) E v is either relation >s (read “more specific than”) according if node, >,? node2 an element-of then node, >.s nodes. We shall also have a dual generality relation and node:! >,s nodes, than”) defined by node1 >g node2 iff node1 cs nodel. It follows ># (read “more general that that individual nodes are maximally general nodes, and in fact that it need not be v may have any number of maximally is called a root node. A path in a hierarchy v general node connected. A maximally (not to be confused with the path in a path logic) will be a sequence node1 , . . , node, wherein node, is link. Two distinct paths will form a redundant either an element-of the first place where they differ. This pair to the common node(s). A path will be means simply if it is a member of a redundant pair. A path having more than one occurrence of the same node is said to contain a loop. Provisions are made in the following not allowed. As is customary, the upward direction being roots appear at the top and individuals extending horizontally that hierarchies with loops or redundant paths are the hierarchies will be drawn as directed graphs, with so that links is a root node and, for each i = 1,. . . , n - 1, the pair (nodei,, if they have some node in common beyond that they comprise redundant two distinct paths in v) appear at the bottom, and with property-of individual or kind nodes. from their associated to less (less general from more specific link or a subset-of (or redundant to more), to ensure , nodei) 136 D.G. Schwartz/Art@kd Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 ( 1,l) indicates the node’s position than several different ( I,1 ) have addresses and so on. Thus a address to some root node. Inasmuch In terms of the above specificity ( l), , ( 1,2), ( 1,3), relation on V, we can assign an address to each indi- vidual and kind node in the folIowing manner. Let the addresses of the root nodes, in any order, be ( l), (2), (3), . . . . Then for, say the node with address let the next most . . .; let the nodes in any order have the addresses specific nodes ( 1, I, 1), ( 1, 1,2), to the one with address next most specific in the hierarchy as an individual or kind node may be more spe- than one such segments of an address are the addresses of that order on addresses. We shall apply > iff rank ranks for the rank of the the rank is not (1,1,3),...; relative cific address. Note the nodes appearing rank. Let > denote also to the nodes having node, >$ nodez. For property and kind nodes, we shall use the term specifci~ (or just rank) synonymously with “address”. Having individual individual an address. let us agree that each property node inherits it is linked. Thus for property nodes and kind nodes, or kind node to which in the path from the usual the same node may have more thus defined specificity that node] > node2 to the node having It is easily verified that the successive those addresses. lexicographic root nodes, the related root node initial We are now in a position to make the notion of dynamic reasoning system completely reasoning rigorous. By a dynamic language expanded as above, together with a sequence of multiple-inheritance in tandem with the path-logic logic, with hierarchies (La, ~0, &a>, ( LI , T~,+I ), VJ,Vl?... . . . as follows. Let va be the hierarchy with no nodes or links. Assume one has formed to form the new proposition P,, that is added (DRS) will be meant a path constructed system triples (G,-~+~,,-I,#+~-I) path r,,. The hierarchy Y, is formed and G-I. C onsider in accordance with: ( I) (2) (3) If P,, is of the form Cla ck) (a), and this formula has not previously in the path ~~~-1, then add an individual node for the individual a kind node for the predicate hierarchy Y,_I, and add an element-of symbol LY (‘1 if these do not already exist appeared constant a and in the link connecting them. isoftheform &3(crCk)(~) d/3 (k) (x) ), and this formula has not previously in the path 7r,,_.,, then add kind nodes for the predicate symbols aCk) IfP,, appeared and /3ck) if these do not already exist in ~,,_i, add a subset-of them (i.e., from cu(@ to Ptk)), and label the link with the quantifier &3, but with the provisions: (a) the link just added must be link connecting in any path in Y, then (b) if this creates a loop removed, if this creates a redundant redundant pair; tive initial segments, common beyond the place where from v the link (nodek_ 1, nodek) leading path let node,,. _ . , nodek and node;, in v then: consider the two paths in the . . . , node:, be their respec- from the root up to the first node they have in if k < k’ (k’ < k), remove they differ; (the link (node;,_ ], node:, 1). If P, is of the form Ci,““( not previously then add an indi~~idual node for the individual exist in v,,_ ], add a property node for the predicate symbol &‘I if this formula has in the path ?rfl_ 1, and if &PI does not bear an index, constant a if one does not already (or TC@)), add a) (or of the form Ci-cz”“(a>), appeared D.G. Schwartz/Art@cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 137 the appropriate property-of Cj. In addition, symbol c&‘) or its negation, the predicate both where it occurs on the node and where it appears link, and label this link with the likelihood modifier in Y of a property node for either affix this symbol with the index k, if this is the kth appearance in P,,. (4) If P, is of the form &i(cw(@(~) + if this formula has not previously not bear an index, v,,_ 1, add a property node for p(p) link, and appearance negation, and where it appears the link with in P,,. label label ,@‘(x)) appeared (or Qi(aCk’(X) --t -,@)(.a+))), in the path rr,,_t, and if p(l)) does then add a kind node for (Y (k) if one does not already exist in (or lp(P) ) , add the appropriate property-of in v of a property node for either the quantifier Qi. In addition, is the kth symbol p(J’) or its this symbol with the index k, both where it occurs on the node the predicate if this permit- in future hierarchy v Note that here only property-of links are allowed to be fuzzy. Extensions links and/or fuzzy element-of links may be considered ting fuzzy subset-of works. It is a consequence constructed constant cate symbol appearing property-type unique appearing of this definition in this manner will have exactly one individual that any multiple-inheritance node for each individual in the path, and exactly one kind node for each kind-type predi- the path, but may have any number of property nodes for each to a in the path. Each property node is linked predicate symbol appearing individual The provisions or kind node. in item It is a consequence ranks are well- defined. in more than one path (and thus have more than one rank) only if those paths originate at different can occur. (2) ensure of the above that an individual or kind node can appear roots. This it will turn out is the only situation in which multiple the associated inheritance specificity that The integer indices on property nodes and property-type of Modus Ponens or the Substitution Rule. More exactly, of the symbol In to a particular predicate applications to keep track of which occurrences occurrences of it in the hierarchy. index attached succeeding Q is inferred P i Q contains the corresponding Similarly, premise contains the corresponding k. The stages occurrence is inferred if P(a/x) that predicate it is to be understood the following symbol will be “carried with” symbols are used in the path correlate with which the it through any if if the Q in the premise symbol with index k, then in the conclusion Q also has index k. from P by the Substitution Rule, and if the P in the predicate symbol with index k, then also has index be described as four-tuples in the conclusion P (a/x) predicate and an occurrence of a property-type occurrence of that symbol in the evolution of a DRS may conveniently from P and P G Q by Modus Ponens, an occurrence of a property-type of that symbol (Li,~i,4i,~i). Given the foregoing definitions, one can define a Specijcity Rule by: (LP, A) (Cj-P, A’) (48 A”), (L,j-RA”), if p > p’ if p’ > p 138 D.G. Schwartz/Art@icinl Inielli~ence 93 (1997) 103-167 CanPly Bird Not ~1 Is-a Tweety IS-l2 Penguin Is-a t opus Fig. 1. Tweety can fly, but can Opus’? the form &)(x) where P is of either the occurrence of &‘) the second remise, p is one of the (possibly many) node for czkv) in the current V, p’ is one of the (possibly many) and assuming or fy (“)(a), specificity P that k is the index of in ranks for the property ranks for specificity in the first premise and that k’ is the index of its occurrence the property node for CY~, as in prior rules, the index when applying the conclusion the most specific node must always (‘) in the current V, p and p’ are comparable by <, and where, in A and A’. In addition, the indices this rule, the status of whichever premise does not wind up becoming to ofi In effect the rule says that the property associated with is changed take priority over the less specific. in h ” is larger than represented the various of this section is concerned with illustrating regarding Tweety and Opus. This particular problem The remainder through a series of examples. We shall begin with the aforementioned these definitions (or pair of problems) situations is customarily [ 1751). Here Tweety clearly can fly, but it is not determined whether Opus can fly or not. On or ambiguous, depending on how one the latter point the diagram interprets satisfactory. Thus the brunt of most treatments of inheritance-based of this and similar such diagrams which will lead to intuitively it, and neither of these results seem completely default reasoning has been to devise the lines of Fig. 1 (adapted is either contradictory from Touretzky’s correct results. interpretations features of along D.G. Schwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 139 Is-a lAveety opus Fig. 2. Tweety likely can fly, and Opus certainly cannot. resulting One possible from the use of a DRS is shown corresponding Fig. 2. This can be generated definitions, r. = 40 = ~0 = 0 (empty set), from LO by adjoining the symbols Birdck), Penguinck), rule sets consist of the versions of Modus Ponens Rule (Sub) described above. Now let path ~1 be obtained diagram in as follows. Let (LO, GTO, 40, ~0) be as in the foregoing i.e., LO is the language with no individual constants or predicate symbols and languages be the one obtained the predicate inference (abbreviated MP) and the Substitution in Section 4, together with the Specificity Rule (Spec) described constants Tweety and Opus and and let 41 and all succeeding let L1 and all succeeding from ~0 by inputting and CanFly( individual the labeled formula (I,{rec},0,on> L3Birdck) (Tweety ) in accordance with item Then adding nodes for Tweety and Birdck), together with an element-of (labeled “is-a” in Fig. 2). Next form 71-2 from ~1 by inputting ( 1) in the definition of DRS, VI is formed from ~0 by them link connecting Q3(Penguinck)(x) + Birdck)(x)) (2, {ret}, 0, on> which requires a node already exists for Birdck), one need only add one for Penguinck), the appropriate that we form ~2 from VI in accordance with DRS item (2). Here, since together with link. Next let us form 7r3 by inputting subset-of C3Penguin Ck) (Opus) (3, {rec},0,on) and form ~3 from 29 by applying DRS Penguinck), element-of link. Next form GT~ by inputting so we need only add one for Opus, item ( 1). Here we already have a node for together with with the appropriate &I (Birdck)(X) --+ CanFly( (4, {ret}, 0, on) 140 D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Inteiiigemce 93 (1997) 103-167 to form ~4 from ~0. Since and apply DRS item (3) not bear an index, we must here add a node for CanFly@), property-of we must appears link. Moreover, since this is the first occurrence of CanFly it appears this symbol with the index 1, both where the above labeled does together with the appropriate in the hierarchy, in ~4 and where it the occurrence of CanFly in 7r4, making now read as fo~ula label Qt (Bird(@(x) + CanFly:“)( Last, form 7rs by inputting (4, {I-e+, 0, on) &s (Penguin(k) (x) --+ -1CanFly@) (x) > (5, {W}, 0,an) and applying DRS item (4). Again so we must add a node for CanFly (“I, together with the appropriate property-of Since symbol with the index 2, both in vs and n-5, making the occurrence of CanFly@) does not bear an index, link. this in the hierarchy, we here label this is the second occurrence the above read as of CanFly G& ( Penguinck) (x) + XanFly:“’ (x) ) (5, {ret}, 0,an) the formation of the hierarchy depicted in Fig. 2. At this point, the speci- This completes ficity ranks of the nodes are: Bird ikf has rank ( I), Tweety has rank ( 1, I), Penguin(k) has rank ( 1,2), Opus has rank ( I, 2, l), CanFly~‘~ the rank (1) from Birdtk), inherits the rank ( 1,2) and CanFly, (iJi inherits the above formulas are introduced that if formula subscripts on the two occurrences of CanFly the one with (i.e., (5) is immaterial . from Penguin fkf Note that the order with which to the structure of the hierarchy, except the formula index 5) had preceded then (4), would be reversed. in Fig. 2 may be used for syllogistic and default reasoning, the above DRS as follows. The intention is to conduct all To see how the hierarchy (in effect, so as to preserve let us continue developing reasoning tion standard be condensed Section 2.4 that all formulas of the form the hierarchy ~5 itself). techniques semantic validity with respect to the implicit In some places where a deduction from classical propositional calculus, the necessary into a single step and justified as such (abbreviated PC). Recall interpreta- follows by steps will here from QjfP + Q) “t(G?,P-r;ciQ) (*) are valid under every soning the appropriate inte~retation, let us first consider instance of (*), namely in a DRS, To illustrate how one does simple syllogistic rea- the situation of Tweety. One begins by inputting Qt (Bird(k)(x) -+ CanFly, ““(x)) ;i(LsBird(“)(x) GLtCanFlyiP)(x)) (6, {=c},0,on) Then from formulas (4) and (6), by propositional calculus, one has CRBird(“)( x) 4 fZCCanFly~“i (x) At this step, in accordance with the definition of path logic the labels for formulas Substitution Rule to (7)) yielding (4) and (6) must be changed (7,{PC,4,6),0,ofi) (Section 4), the to-lists from 0 to (7). Next apply in the D.G. Schwartz/Art@cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 141 CsBirdck)(Tweety) -r;LtCanFlyi”)(Tweety) (8, {Sub, 7}, 0, on) and here change and (8)) giving the to-list for (7) the desired result CtCanFlyi”)(Tweety) to (8). Then Modus Ponens can be applied to ( 1) (9,{MP, 1,8},0,on) with the to-lists Simple default for (1) and (8) now reading reasoning may be illustrated (9). in the situation with Opus. Again using (*), input Qs(Penquin(k)(X) -+ Birdck) (x) ) G( LsPenguin (k)(~) 4 C,Birdck)(X)) ( 10, {ret}, 0, on> Then from (2) and (lo), by propositional calculus, one has CsPenguin ck) (x) -li CsBirdck) (x) (ll,{PC,2,10},0,on) Here the to-lists propositional calculus to (7) and ( 11)) yielding in the labels for (2) and ( 10) are changed from 0 to { 11). Now apply CsPenguin ck)(_x) A,CtCanFly[“)(x) U2,{PC,7,11},0,on) and changing yielding the to-lists for (7) and (11) to { 12). Next apply the Substitution Rule, Cs ( Penguinck) (Opus) + Lt CanFly{“)( Opus) ) (13, {Sub, 12}, 0, on) with to-list for (12) changed has CtCanFlyf”)(Opus) to { 13). Then from (3) and (13), by Modus Ponens, one (14,{MP,3,13},0,on) with to-lists for (3) and (13) changed to (14). Now apply (*) again to get Qs (Penguin’k)( x) + CanFly:“)( x) ) A( CsPenguin’k)( x) % LsCanFlyp)( x) ) (15,{m},0,on) Then from (5) and (15) by propositional calculus one has CsPenguin(k’ (x) Ij LsXanFly$‘) (x) ) ( 16, {PC, 5,15}, 0, on) (with to-lists for (5) and (15) now { 16)) which, by Substitution, yields CsPenguin(k) (Opus) -li LsCanFlyp)( Opus) ) ( 17, {Sub, 16}, 0, on) (with to-list for (16) now { 17)). By Modus Ponens, (3) and (17) give CsCanFlyp)( Opus) (18, {MP, 3,17}, 0,on) to-list (with are in a position node for -CanFly?’ for (3) becoming { 14,18} and to-list for ( 17) becoming { 18)). Now we the Specificity Rule to (14) and (18). Since the rank of the to apply is > that of the node for CanFlyiP), this yields f+CanFly:“) (Opus) ( 19, {Spec, 14,18}, 0,~) 142 D.G. Schwartz/Arti$ciul Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 Aquatic Is-not t ‘: Mammal Whale Is-a. BlueWhale IS-a. t Bosco Fig. 3. Is Bosco aquatic, or not? with to-list for ( 14) and ( 18) becoming { 19}, and with the status indicator for ( 14) being changed further use of the undesired to u# Thus we arrive at the desired conclusion, in the label and forbid any Having fully detailed alternative. this first example, examples by considering only the manners Fig. 3 is a puzzle adapted Opus, in that it is not explicitly evident whether Bosco the same manner as for Opus. Here one need only than a kind. Then arguing upward through is a mammal. Next, after the appropriate from Stein’s the work will be shortened on the remaining in which they differ from preceding examples. [ 1681. This is similar to the foregoing case of (in fact, again either contradictory or ambiguous) in essentially rather take “aquatic” as a property the kind nodes, one can conclude arguments, syllogistic that BOSCO together with the fact is aquatic. As shown in Fig. 4, this problem may resolved D.G. Schwarh/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 143 ~~maL (k)/!!?_b TAquatic t (‘) All 1 whdeCk) A11 ) Aquatic2 (PI All I BlueWhale (k) IS-a t Bosco Fig. 4. Bosco is an aquatic mammal is more specific than TAquatic, (I’), the Specificity Rule gives that Bosco that Aquatic?) certainly is aquatic. from (taken inherits properties, two conflicting [ 1771). Here the problem Fig. 5 is the well-known Nixon Diamond is and the diagram does not say how this that Nixon in a DRS is shown conflict should be resolved. One way in which this might be handled is taken as a in Fig. 6. There “quaker” and “republican” property, and for the sake of the illustration, links are qualified with the fuzzy quantifier most. As was pointed out in Section 1.2, the choice of whether a given predicate is oftentimes the present choice arbitrary, and this is surely has the advantage of leading are taken as kinds, “pacifist” the property-of the case here. As will be seen, however, to the intuitively desirable a property versus a kind should be interpreted as representing result. Let us reason informally. Suppose that after the first four steps, the path is Nixon is a quaker. Most quakers are pacificistst . Nixon is a republican. Most republicans are not pacificists;?. (l,{wc},0,on) 0, on) (2, {m}, (3, {rec},0,on) (4, {ret}, 0,on) 144 D.G. Schwnrrz/Arf@cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 Pacifist Quaker Republican Nixon Fig. 5. Nkm Diamond: Is Nixon a pacifist, or not? Quaker (k)s Pacifist 1 (‘I Republican (k)Mosl lPacifist, (‘I Nixon Fig. 6. It is ztncertain whether Nixon is a pacifist. This creates (here condensing several steps into one) to conclude the figure as shown. Then from ( 1) and (2)) one may argue syllogistically Nixon likely is a pacifist,. (5, {Syh, 1,2}, 0, on> and from (3) and (4)) one may argue syllogistically to conclude Nixon is likely not a pacifist;?. 6{Sy%3,4),0,on~ Now recall from Section 2.4, that all formulas of the form are valid. Taking i = -2, this gives Nixon is unlikely to be a pacifist2 iff Nixon is likely not a pacifist;!. (7, {ret}, 0,on> D.G. Schwnrtz/Arr$cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 145 Then from (6) and (7) one can derive Nixon is unlikely to be a pacifistz. (8, {PC, 6,7}, 0, on) Let the rule set for our DRS now be expanded described by Table 2 (Section 4). Then by the rule corresponding from (5) and (8) one obtains to include the modifier combination to row 2, column rules -2, It is uncertain whether Nixon is a pacifisto. (9, {Tb12(2, -2)) 5,8}, 0, on) for (5) and (8) must be changed At this step, the status indicators the index of the predicate be a part of the general definition of the modifier combination using such a rule, prevents of new nodes and/or prescribed by the definition of DRS). to 08 Note that here “pacifist” has been given as 0. This action would naturally rules, inasmuch as, after index” into the path from leading also to the entry (i.e., as would be irrelevant. The use of 0 as a “dummy inheritance hierarchy the index becomes into the associated of this formula the introduction links and Touretzky This conclusion to the “skeptical” regarding Nixon corresponds [ 791, and clearly conforms with ordinary common in keeping with Fig. 5, would have both occurrences Thomason, variation, perhaps more modifier Most in Fig. 6 replaced by All. Then arguments on the one hand, not a pacifist, contradiction inheritances of Horty, sense. A of the such as the above would yield, that Nixon certainly is a pacifist, and on the other that he is certainly the from which modifier combination -3) would yield (row 3, column I (9,{Tbl2(3,-3),5,8},@,on) (8) changed lead next to in Section 4. based on those culprits. Here one might want, for example, formulas, further status modifications to 08 This would naturally along the lines described again with status of (5) and application of some form of reason maintenance The simplest approach would be to just turn the status of (9) to 08, thereby disallowing its use in any future derivations. Another would be to backtrack the from-lists through turn their status indicators 08, and to weed out one or more earlier “culprit” to to-lists making then forward chain through all conclusions to disable the formula which says that all quakers are pacifists (and also the above contradiction i), is a republican. A third approach would be to go back through the quantifiers, chain through disable Nixon’s pacifism. The details of how and when to apply yet to be worked out. as he and alter e.g., change one or more occurrences of all to most, and then forward to make appropriate modifier changes. The effect here would be to i and introduce a qualified statement about techniques have is (certainly) not a pacifist the above contradictory as appropriate the possibility these various the from-lists leaving only that Nixon conclusion inasmuch to-lists Note that the Specificity Rule would not be applicable in the Nixon example, since the rankings of Pacifist, Quaker and Republican inherited by Pacifist1 and Pacifistz, would make no difference also inheritance that Nixon has two ranks, paths. and Pacifist2 are assigned in Fig. 6 are not comparable ranks respectively, if Republican were ranked and neither ( 1) and (2), respectively, these are then is > than the other; and it ( 1) and Quaker with (2). Note to the two possible (1, 1) and (2, l), corresponding by <. To wit, if 146 D.G. Sclzwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (I 997) 103-167 Milk-Producer Is-a I Mammal / \*-a Furry Animal Egg-Layer Platypus Is-a t Suzie Fig. 7. Is Suzie a mammal, hence a milk producer? Does she lay eggs? from Stein’s Fig. 7 is also adapted [ 1681. Here it is indeterminate whether Susie is a mammal, and hence also whether she is a milk-producer. One of the several possible ways this might be dealt with in a DRS is shown in Fig. 8. The various decisions as to what should be properties versus kinds seem at least reasonable. Given the techniques of the foregoing examples can be applied to infer that Suzie is certainly a lays eggs. It is of interest, mammal, that even though Fig. 7 bears a structure solution via predicate hierarchies, one involving multiple that she certainly produces milk, and she certainly to two very different kinds of inheritance to Fig. 5, the corresponding leads inheritance, this hierarchy, and one not. similar typing Another problem arising arising in the literature from the “redundancy” is depicted has a contradiction from Clyde to Elephant. A simple solution using the current methods in there being in Fig. 9 (from [ 1771) Here one two alternative paths is Fig. 10, yielding D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 147 Most - Mammal (‘) -+ Az1 HasFur1(P) ProducesMilk (P) Platypus (4 - All Lay@+ (PI Is-a t Suzie Fig. 8. Susie is a mammal that produces milk and lays eggs that Clyde the conclusion in which the definition of DRS implicitly prevents formulas needed is likely not gray. The significant to create this hierarchy, one next introduces a formula saying the redundancy. feature here is the manner the If after inputting Clyde is an Elephant. DRS item (2b) ately after adding requires that the corresponding (redundant) if this formula were input prior to, say, link be removed immedi- it. Alternatively, Royal elephants are elephants. then DRS item (2b) would allow the link to be added, but when the link corresponding to the latter is added, creating a 2-step path from Clyde to Elephant, that the l-step would now require former formula, be removed. Thus, as shown then the same item to the link from Clyde in any case, one winds up with the same hierarchy corresponding to Elephant, in Fig. 10. Last consider the somewhat more complex Expanded Nixon Diamond it is indeterminate from In this case the significant [ 1771). Fig. 11 (also pacifist and whether he is anti-military. A possible Here feature properties and kinds, namely, “pacifist” and “football needed formulas to create this (disconnected) is that certain predicates hierarchy, one would shown both whether Nixon in is a rendition of this in a DRS is Fig. 12. both are taken as representing the formulas the then also want to input fan”. After inputting QsPacifist’k’ (x) G &Pacifist@) (x) &sFootballFan(k) (x) tr; QFootballFan(“) (x) 148 D.G. SchwartdArtijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 Gray Thing Is-a I Is-not-a L Royal Elephant Is-a Fig. 9. Is Clyde gray, or not? Elephant (k) -b All (PI Gray1 RoyalElephant All I (k) Most is-a I Clyde -w lGray2 (PI Fig. 10. Clyde is likely not gray D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 149 Anti-military / \t Pacifist Football Fan / \f_/ Quaker Republican \ / Nixon Fig. 11. Expanded Nixon Diamond: Is Nixon anti-military, or not? Quaker (‘I % Pacifist 1 (‘I Republican (k)Most lpacifist, (‘) \ / \Ew FootballFan Nixon Pacifist (‘I Most AntiMilitary 1 (‘I FootballFan (‘I s ~AntiMilitary2 (‘I Fig. 12. It is uncertain whether Nixon is anti-military. IS0 D.G. Schwnrrz,/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 formal connections between the lines of the foregoing Nixon Diamond the predicate symbols of the two example will and is likely to be anti-military, that Nixon, on the one hand, is unlikely that it is uncertain whether Nixon to be anti-military, which is anti-military through modifier combination or not. This again seems to along the necessary reasoning establishing types. Then lead to the propositions on the other hand, yields comply with ordinary common sense. Note that instead of the above the lines of, e.g., along something two formulas it might have been preferable to input Qj (Pacifist(k) (x) +G Pacifist”” (x) ) in order to more exactly capture same underlying predicate, but such formulas are not expressible One possible level, defined semantically language. for this would be to introduce a binary ~b at the lower linguistic that Pacifistck) and Pacifist@) denote in the present the intention remedy by the ifeitherZ(P) =Z(Q) = 1 or I(P) =I(Q) =O, in accordance with the definitions Then formula in Section 4, one would have the second-level &j (Pacifist’@ (x) +-+h Pacifist’“’ (x) ) which does capture binary techniques. (classical) the intended interrelation. It is noteworthy connectives could be introduced at the lower also that a full set of similar level using 6. The notion of “unless” The matter of formulating [ 1531 and has appeared The problem is to devise a system throughout that allows for propositions such as the everyday notion of “unless” dates back to Sandewall’s (see Section 7.5). the literature in various guises Bird(x) z CanFly( x) Unless Penguin(x) or possibly Bird(x) liCanFly(x) Unless x = Opus which state that individuals dividuals, propositions are exceptions having certain properties, or possibly certain that birds can fly. The intention to the “rule” in- specific is that such be used in syllogisms of the form, for open P, Q, R, P li Q Unless R P(a/x) qR(a/x) Q(a/x) D.G. Schwartz/Art$cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 151 where R is a disjunction a~([‘) (x) or x = a. of any number of possible exceptions having either the form It happens that this style of reasoning is already implicit in Section 5. In effect, exceptions as in the example of Opus. In order hierarchies described based on specificity, notion of “unless”, however, relevant modifiers. For example, one might want a rule along the lines of inferences. Note that these same considerations the exceptions need to be explicitly in the methods of inheritance that block defaults are nodes the above stated along with the arise in the context of the fuzzy to fully portray Most birds can fly. Tweety Tweety is a bird. is not exceptional. It is likely that Tweety can fly. it will be outlined how such rules might be formulated within a DRS by include as a sixth in an appropriate way. Let formula labels that framework Here extending item an exception predicate symbols and any number of individual rule: for open P, Q, list, denoted ex, which may contain any number of property-type Introduce as a new inference constants. (&,(P’Q,>A) (P(a/x), n is not exceptional A’) as per exA the third premise is validated by (i) verifying where a’ E exA is a = cl’, and (ii) searching backwards each ~6”) E exn, that no formula of the form (Y (P)(u) has formerly been derived. semantics effect, one here adopts a procedural the path and verifying, that for no individual constant for In for logical inference. through that is received by the DRS from outside the human user could provide some such exceptions into the exception in the list for any formula This clearly has the desired effect. It remains only to establish a procedure for making list. A simple approach would be to have exceptions be already the system. in advance. In addition they as a result of reasoning with the semantic network. This would require process and “notice” item entries present For example, to this, however, one would also want exceptions are “discovered” higher-level mechanisms when an exceptional reserved situation has appeared. Exactly how to do this is another to be entered into the list whenever for future works. that “observe” the ongoing reasoning 7. Other varieties of nonmonotonicity While the notion of a DRS was devised initially fuzzy modifiers, with section outlines how one may formulate versions of the earlier varieties of nonmonotonic it can be used also to portray other to formulate default reasoning types of reasoning. This 152 D.G. Schwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 reasoning were only (Section implicit 1) within in the earlier formalisms. this frame. This makes explicit the temporal aspects that 7.1. Circumscription “predicate” circumscription 1 .l. These McCarthy’s were described in Section versions were proposed. Minker and Perlis [ 961 introduced Lifschitz circumscription, considered “with sets”, and in circumscribing cumscription”. low circumscriptive and related difficulties [95,97,98, in [ 1031. 1391. A concise subsequently Some general problems of self-reference axioms were discussed by Perlis appeared summary may be found [ 1001 and “formula” circumscription ideas soon attracted a following, [ 1011 and further a method of “protected” [ 11 l] developed “pointwise” circumscription, [ 1361 introduced arising [ 1353 Perlis the idea of “autocir- in systems which al- to these as [41,42]. Other relevant works are [ 1371 and a recent history [ 1341, and a solution in This section considers only predicate circumscription. if in a similar way. Let cy be an n-ary predicate symbol, and let the others can be handled P( cu) be a first-order formula n(x), where X stands for the sequence x1,. . . , x,, of individual variables. Let d! be an n-ary predicate variable, and let P (&/a) with occurrences of iu. Then, considered as a rule of inference, Predicate Circumscription may be expressed as from P(U) by replacing all occurrences of cy It has yet to be determined be the expression obtained formula containing the elementary P(ff) P(&/a) r\V’x(&(a) --f P) + V’x(P 4 k(X)) “rule of conjecture”. sequences of individual It has the effect of from the constants the formulas P( a’/_?) (i = 1, . . . , m) are theory T for which this as a nonmonotonic to be true, then after applying that, if a’, . . . ,zi”’ are all the nary McCarthy described saying language of a first-order known about which P can possibly be true. Knowing formally by its being derivable for T to a collection of minimal models. At the semantic the orzly models in which P(a) This style of reasoning harbors a temporal element level, circumscription the rule, these will be the only nary in T. The rule is validated by restricting sequences that a formula P is true is expressed the semantics says that is valid are the smallest ones in which it must be valid. the above rule the minimal arises in that some conclusions rule application may no longer be valid in the newer models. are thus retracted simply by virtue of the fact that the newer about which P( cu) is true, then the foregoing in that, if after applying by expanding invalid, and can only be revalidated the new individuals. Nonmonotonicity becomes to include from rule, one discovers new individuals application models derived the earlier Such earlier conclusions render models This type of reasoning ering” new propositions include the new individual them invalid. can be described individuals would be represented of the form P(a) (a/.?). in a DRS framework as follows. “Discov- some new to by the system’s “receiving” In this step, the language would be expanded constants. Then in this context, the rule of circumscription D.G. Schwartz/Art$cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 153 be reapplied, yielding a “conjecture ” identical a later time step. By having a different to the above, except with a label would indicating this formula can be provided with a different set of models, and retraction of the earlier conjecture would be accom- to ofi Then to-lists would need to be traced in plished by switching thus order to also retract any conclusions retracted. that may have been based on the conjecture its status indicator label, 7.2. Default logic The formulation of default logic due to Reiter [ 1501 has inspired several alternative employ that similarly versions not use inheritance [ 145,146], Nute [ 1721. and Kifer the intuitive appeal of Reiter’s version, Despite the more conventional include Fisher hierarchies. These [128-1311, Li and You [94], Simari and Loui [ 1611, Thirunarayan style of formalism, [50], Pollock i.e., that do [ 142-1441, Poole it has the well-known drawback that in all but the very simplest cases, it is either impossible, or very difficult, This is due to its use of the operator M, meaning “is consistent”. the semantic because, in that context, whether an arbitrarily formally undecidable. And in simpler systems, consistency selected set of formulas like propositional it is normally computationally logic, for example, M richness of first-order is impossible is decidable, intractable. to implement. In a system offering to implement is consistent is calculus, even though An inference rule similar in spirit with Reiter’s default could nonetheless in a DRS, if one were to replace mented of “local consistency”. Let (L, r, 4) be a path-logic r be its number of formula occurrences; includes which employs applications that a formula Q is n-ply consistent with r II + 112, do we have either (i) Q E $‘, or (ii) Q(a/x) n of L. Let M,Q desired rule may be written represent the operator M with one representing be imple- a kind triple in a DRS; let the length of and let an extension of v be any path which in L, and is m. Then say length constant the if, for no extension 7r’ of r having E $‘, for any individual r as an initial segment, which is comprised exclusively of formulas only of rules in 4. Suppose the length of r “Q is n-ply consistent with the current path”. Then P’;Q P M,,Q Q if after drawing a conclusion Q based on it’s n-ply consistency, that Q is in fact inconsistent, type of reasoning would be useful in conjunction with a suitable system. it is later dis- there would be a way for it to be retracted. for robot motion planning. The robot could to look ahead some number of steps in order to determine whether a reason maintenance action may reasonably be expected it would be allowed to lead to the desired goal, and if nothing to go ahead and make the considered Such would best be used Then, covered This be programmed particular to the contrary step. is detected, IS4 D.G. Schwartz,/Art$icinl Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 7.3. Nonmonotonic logic The system of nonmonotonic in that it did not provide a completely logic introduced by McDermott specified and Doyle semantics. McDermott to fill this void, but with limited success. A modification which effec- [ 114,115]. is reviewed logic” developed by Moore [ 1221 adds further results along this line, and recent progress problematic [ 1051 attempted tively solved this problem was the “autoepistemic The collection in [116]. [ 1071 was Section 1 noted that the original system is characterized by having propositions of the form PAMQ’;Q where again M reinterpretation of nonmonotonic Section 3. Here one simply 0. The extent be explored. to which is interpreted as “is consistent” but is now taken more exactly as a of the classical modality “is possible”. This suggests that a semblance logic may be formulated within the type of extension of Q described in takes the above M as another notation for the probabilistic this gives the desirable features of the later systems has yet to 7.4. Truth maintenance The subject of truth (or reason) maintenance times this paper, and it has been explained how a simple variety of this could be the early the temporal aspect of natural human reasoning. truth maintenance addressed has been mentioned is unique among several system [25] richer and more complex style of reasoning here, however. There each formula in time, a formula in its in-list are “in”, and (ii) all the formulas than has is associated with both an in list if (i) all the (not in its out list are “out” is “in” (believed) in a DRS. Doyle’s in that it explicitly throughout employed proposals That system employed a somewhat been considered and an out list. At any given point formulas believed). Nonetheless, this richer for a formula can be given as additional of DRS. The in-list and out-list label. Then with status not currently context of a full-fledged DRS, if one allows for formulas for removal of any corresponding also provide logical structure can be formulated via an expanded notion in the in the path is in the path with status “off”. Note that, in the then one must let a formula be “in” it all the members of it in-list are present indicators “on”, and let it be “out” if some member of its out-list either in the path or is present items in the associated to be retracted, semantic net. items 7.5. “Unless” revisited Each of circumscription, default logic, and nonmonotonic logic embody aspects of “unless”. McCarthy tion with a predicate ab expressing “abnormality”. For example, [ 100, 1011 explained how circumscription may be used in conjunc- Bird(x) A ?ab(x) + CanFly D.G. Schwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 155 if x is a bird, and x is not abnormal, then x can fly, Suppose there are that says two individuals, Tweety and Opus, asserted have ab(Opus). which says above mal. Then predicate the only bird says inference that circumscription with respect that can fly is Tweety. Thus, to be birds, and suppose we additionally to ab yields a formula the in so many words, to be abnor- known that a bird can fly u~zless it is explicitly In default logic, the modal operator M embodies inconsistent, where inconsistent means of expressing unless Thus as was seen, if it is known assume this says that he can’t. The M “inconsistent” that Opus cannot to that he can, in which case the default would not be applied. In so many words, it is explicitly known similarly, but where fly, then it would be inconsistent that Opus can fly unless logic may be interpreted that it is permitted to infer in nonmonotonic is synonymous with “impossible”. to a contradiction. the notion of unless leading in the sense The formulation of unless given in Section 6 bears many similarities with these, and is that Its advantage alternative. may be thus construed as a further, roughly equivalent, implementation. it leads to a much more straightforward 8. The frame problem agent the sense Informally a situation environment. as transitions As mentioned from one situation in which an intelligent in time, and successive changes in Section 1 .l, the frame problem was defined by McCarthy and Hayes [ 1041 in the context of an elaboration of McCarthy’s situation calculus [ 991. The aim (human or of this calculus was to formalize digital) may keep track of, reason about, and possibly affect the changes taking place in is a description of the state of affairs its surrounding that obtain at a particular point are to the next. The word frume is taken more represented or less synonymously of being a It may also be regarded analogously with a frame in a movie film. frame of reference. Formally to s has a blue persist to change. To illustrate, block sitting on the left side of a table, and situation the the fluents “color” and “position”. One would say that in block fluent has changed, while the s to situation s’, the position the transition the block red) color fluent (barring any unknown [ 73, has remained unchanged. A concise in Hayes’ p. 1251 as follows: actions, such as painting restatement of the problem appears suppose situation s’ is obtained by moving to the right. Consider from situation a frame consists of a collection of properties, in time but are subject called Juents, which the added connotation in the environment with “situation”, intermediary but carries tend One feels that there should be some economical saying what changes an action makes, without having things do it. That is the frame problem. list all the it doesn’t change as well; yet there doesn’t seem to be any other way to and principled way of succinctly to explicitly This has subsequently come to be recognized field of AI. Both McCarthy and Hayes have returned and the latter in [69,73,74]. Moreover, Hayes [70,72] as one of the key problems to the topic, the former in the in [ 1021 has tied it to a new realm of 156 D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 applications workshops appeared in the review [ 1741 of [52]. known as “naive physics”. The problem has become [ 19,5 1,52,148], the subject of several and a recent survey of the main issues and contributors has statement the qualification problem An outgrowth of these studies has been the identification In particular, of a number of related prob- [ 100, 101 ] is exemplified impos- (or prevent a to impossible (or action), and the persis- that of how to represent which fluents endure, and which do not endure, lems and subproblems. by the parenthetical sible to list all the exceptions which might certain action). Others are the rumijcation specify all the potential tence problem, as the system moves from each situation to wit, that it is generally a certain inference that it is generally in the above example, invalidate problem, consequences to the next. of a given inference Proper analysis of these problems requires first of all that a clear distinction be theory” distinction internal-external the changes of situation [ 15,241. From this vantage the changes of state effected by the internal processes of the reasoning environment. in that occur has been explored made between the agent’s external agent and to some depth in the literature on This it is clear that none of the above problems “situation in the foregoing arise in the context of multiple-inheritance sections. This about an essentially is in these cases always static universe. Even though both the path and inheritance hierarchy can grow over time, the underlying static. In other words, we have here been modeling There the evolution of an agent’s knowledge about an unchanging is nothing universe. in the notion of DRS, however, which requires reasoning as it is described domain of discourse is because one reasoning inherent remains always be the case. Indeed propositions the DRS to perform certain actions they can be internal external environment representations (e.g., sensor data). being added to the path can be instructions (e.g., of information turn right, send a message received concerning that this for to agent X), or in the changes In the case of a human agent interacting with the real world, that both state and situation transitions a representational it is more natural formalism to assume time steps. The length of a step might be the time required action. inference, some other kind of primitive or to perform suitable that at least the internal it would be natural to occur along a time continuum. When in a digital agent, for implementation in to perform one this In making that the agent must forsake a certain variety states agent would be one whose internal state changes occur assume developing however, discrete logical assumption of omniscience, exactly mirror one thereby implicitly agrees inasmuch as an all-knowing the external situations. In addition one must also forsake the kind of omniscience which claims a complete inasmuch as humans future events of all past and potential (see Section 1). This of course understanding justified, it would be unreasonable particular has argued along not actually need underly virtually all studies agents which reason and make successful decisions information the external world. From frame problem may be viewed as a cognitive is themselves do not have such perfect awareness. Hence [ 1061 in itself may this view may be seen to inasmuch as they aim to create incomplete this of any digital agents. McDermott that the frame problem indeed a perfect resolution of the to be strived toward to suggest and reasoning, in spite of having only to expect these ideal, i.e., something to be completely in nonmonotonic this standpoint, resolved; about lines D.G. SchwartdArtQicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 IS7 in an effort to create ever more sophisticated digital agents, but not something one would expect to ever fully achieve. internal this within in the agent’s involve changes state. It would be natural in any number of (propositions Here it will be outlined how these various problems might be construed within context of a DRS. In order to do so, it will be necessary by a transition transition purposes of portraying to agree that a state transition as an initial segment of a path, and a state transition will entail a single reasoning either back into the path and changing or possibly below). Note that there is no loss of generality easily represented the to decide what should be meant that a state to allow fluents. For it will be simpler involves only one such change. Then a state may be given step, from a path of some length n to one of length n + 1, or (ii) going from “on” to “off”, (see in this, since multiple changes can be some proposition’s (iii) one action of each of these types made in immediate the framework of a DRS, however, as a sequence of individual status indicator representing) (i) moving succession changes. Given these assumptions, relevant fluent by a proposition state II might consist of the propositions: the persistence problem amounts each in the path. In the blocks world example given above, to that of representing The block is on the left. (with status “on”) The block is blue. (status “on”) in which case state n + 1 would consist of The block is on the left. (with status now “off”) The block is blue. (status “on”) The block is on the right. (status “on”) fluent has changed together with a change the fact that the position In this manner, of a new proposition, the fact that the color fluent has endured the second proposition to the one employed by the STRIPS planning solvable in this context the given situation. To the extent further is represented by the addition and is represented by the fact that the status of is similar is to a [ 491. The persistence problem to list all the fluents pertinent that some fluents may be left out, this constitutes in the path has remained unchanged. This procedure system that it is possible in the status for an earlier proposition, to the extent impingement The qualification on the agent’s omniscience. problem harkens the discussion all relevant exceptions in Section 6. In that context, in a proposition’s because certain exceptions are omitted or this exception amounts to the problem of including list. Here omniscience might be compromised overlooked. The ramification problem amounts given path. Since paths are potentially solving some finite number of possible this is taken to include prescience. this problem to that of exploring infinite, and are also potentially all possible extensions of a in number, is not generally possible. One is able to explore out only as far as is limited here insofar as future steps. Thus omniscience infinite Last let us consider the frame problem to do with how an agent may keep track of what changes and what remains itself. Inasmuch as the persistence problem has the same 158 D.G. Schwurh/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (I 997) 103-167 as the agent’s attention moves from one situation the frame problem. to this, however, In addition agent may know what may change, and what may continue particular with endowing than to merely keep track of what has occurred to the next, it is an important part of the latter has also to do with how the to persist, as a result of a is that it has to do to predict what will occur in the future, rather In effect, the critical aspect of the frame problem the agent with an ability in the past. action. The earliest, and most straightforward, way of dealing with this is to introduce what that in a to use frame rules. This in fact was the are known as frame axioms. For example, one might add a proposition merely moving a block will not change DRS, however, original method proposed by Hayes asserting its color. In order to assert such principles it would be more appropriate [ 691. Here one could add (Blue(Block-1), A) (Blue( Block- I ), A’) Then if at a later time it is learned could be invoked nance operation “solve” framework. The crux of the problem rules that may be relevant to a given domain. that Block-l has been painted to resolve red, a reason mainte- the contradiction. This of course does not the DRS to list all the frame is that it is typically impossible the frame problem, but merely shows how it may be expressed within 9. Concluding remarks (DRS) reasoning In process is explicitly that a default to be represented within the notion of a dynamic This paper has introduced theme has been to introduce system explained how this may be used to formulate various forms of nonmonotonic A secondary how this may be employed syllogism reasoning information both types of reasoning and reasoning. the logic Q of quali$ed syllogisms and to show in a new type of default reasoning. The use of a qualified is likely true is equally as natural as the style of that a default holds as long as no countervailing to conclude in which one simply assumes known. A virtue of the DRS formalism the same frame. items for further this work has left open numerous Several sections. A further in which the notion of a DRS might be expanded would be to include not just each of which is rules. One would expect in this case that some and that there would be axioms and inference these interrelations. For example, one language might be of the ordinary logic. [ 165,166] ) , those have been mentioned manner one type of language, but a variety of different equipped with its own set of inference of the languages would be interrelated, rules expressing first-order variety, another might be second-order, In addition, as shown by the literature on conceptual graphs (e.g., Sowa’s there are numerous provided by a simple multiple-inheritance The DRS is a simple, yet general, to consider semantic networks having features beyond and a third might be a temporal types of languages, at various places is that it allows the preceding investigation. throughout hierarchy. reasons for framework which can serve as the basis for much or for creating more “intelligent” In particular, more sophisticated reasoning systems. D.G. Schwnrtz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 159 agents, one will need a layer of higher-level toward specific goals. Such would entail an algorithm to apply when, exactly how reason maintenance rules under which new symbols need to be added to the languages, “autonomous” the agent inference the conditions might be accomplished namely, also wish to add a capacity [26] agents should be able to choose between situation demands. for a start in this direction). implementing a logic of beliefs, obligations, for reasoning with expectations, In principle, several different controls capable of guiding for deciding which should be carried out, etc. This [ 1591, and abilities. But to this one may (see just as with human agents, our digital strategies as the and desires intentions, reasoning in part through such methods as described by Shoham Another issue here left open again is how to prescribe for purposes of achieving goals. The notion of an “agent society” has been advanced the notion of a DRS could serve well for by Shoham and Tennenholtz this idea. Each agent in the society would be given as a distinct DRS. This formulating provides reasoning about the messages thus received, and performing for both the receiving and sending of messages, various other types of actions. rules for agent [ 1601, and interaction, is here meant a memory types of minds, where by “mind” The ultimate objective of AI has traditionally been to create agents with ever more human-like together with a reasoning mechanism. Whether we should actually want our digital agents to be human- [ 751. Perhaps a more realistic like, however, has recently become a subject for debate that it would be aim would be to first identify among humans desirable in our machines. activities, and there conceivably Such would surely like desire and fear. On the other could be use for agents for behaving hand, one probably would not want to replicate the present notion of DRS is, in this light, only irrationally or making mistakes. While in these a very rudimentary of mind itself. directions. This of course will also require gaining a deeper understanding to make only and goal-seeking that respond with emotions then seek reasoning those mental activities the human propensity it does show potential for being developed and include kind of “mind”, these manifest to replicate, Acknowledgements Early work on the system Q was supported by grant number NOOO14-92-J-1749 from the Summer of 1992. Much of the background the Office of Naval Research, covering Institute, University research was carried out during a one-semester visit at the Beckman of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, to Patrick Hayes for helping make this possible. The visit was funded as a research semester granted by Florida State University. A major portion of the final draft was completed during Summer 1995 under a summer-support grant provided by the Florida State University Committee on Faculty Research Support. Fall 1994. I am grateful References I I I E. Adams, The logic of conditionals, Inquiry 8 ( 1965) 166-197 in: ( 199 I ) 160 D.C. Schwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (I 997) 103-167 121 E. Adams, Probability and the logic of conditionals, in: J. Hintikka and P Suppes, eds., Aspects of Inductive Logic (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1966) 265-3 16. [ 3 I E. Adams, The logic of “almost all”, J. Philos. Logic 3 ( 1974) 3-17. 14 ] E. Adams, The Logic of Conditionals (Reidel, Dordrecht, IS] S. Amarger, R. Epenoy and S. Grihon, Reasoning with conditional 1975). linear programming Management Systems) Esprit Project, RP2 Workshop, Albi, France based method, ( 1990) 154-167. a in: Proceedings DRUMS (Dejieasible Reasoning and Uncertainty probabilities-NumQuant: 161 S. Amarger, D. Dubois and H. Prade, Handling imprecisely known conditional probabilities, Proceedings UNICOM, “AI and Computer Power: The Impact on Statistics”, London, England 32 pages. 17 1 S. Amarger, D. Dubois and H. Prade, Constraint propagation with imprecise conditional probabilities in: Proceedings 7th Conference on Uncertainty in Artihcial Intelligence, Los Angeles, CA (Morgan Kaufmann, Palo Alto, CA, 1991) 26-34. 18 I S. Amarger, D. Dubois and H. Prade, Imprecise quantifiers and conditional probabilities, in: R. Kruse and P Siegel, eds., Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Uncertainty: Proceedings European Conference ECSQAU, Marseille, France (Springer, New York, 199 1) 33-37. 191 E Bacchus, Representing and Reasoning with Probabilistic Knowledge: A Logical Approach to Probabilities (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990). I1C II E Bacchus, Lp, a logic for representing and reasoning with statistical knowledge, Computational Intelligence 6 ( 1990) 209-23 I. E Bacchus, A.J. Grove, J.Y. Halpern and D. Keller, Statistical Proceedings IJCAI-93, Chambtry, France F. Bacchus, A.J. Grove, J.Y. Halpem and D. Keller, From statistical knowledge bases belief, Artijicial Intelligence 87 (1996) 75-143. J. Barwise and R. Cooper, Generalized quantifiers and natural ( 1993) 563-569. foundations Ill I12 [ 13 for default reasoning, in: to degrees of language, Linguistics and Philosophy 4 (1981) 159-219. [ 14 I J. Barwise and S. Feferman, Model-Theoretic Logics (Springer, New York, 1985). 1 IS 1 J. Barwise and J. Perry, Situations and Attitudes (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1983). I I6 I C. Boutilier, On the semantics of stable inheritance reasoning, Computational Intelligence 9 ( I ) ( 1993) 73-l IO. I I7 1 R.J. Brachman, What Computer (October 1983) 30-36. IS-A is and isn’t: an analysis of taxonomic links in semantic networks, IEEE [ IS] R.J. Brachman, Magazine 6 (3) I lied about (1985) 80-93. the trees or defaults and definitions in knowledge representation, AI [ 19 I EM. Brown, ed., The Frame Problem in Artificial Intelligence: Proceedings 1987 Workshop (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987). [ 20 I D.V. Budescu, R. Zwick, T.S. Wallsten and 1. Erev, Integration of linguistic probabilities, Internat. .I. Man-Muchine Studies 33 (1990) 657-676. [ 2 I I A.Y. Darwiche, A symbolic generalization of probability theory, Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (1993). and M.L. Ginsberg, A symbolic generalization [ 22 I A.Y. Darwiche of probability theory, in: Proceedings AAAI-92, San Jose, CA (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992) 622-627. I23 I B. DeFinetti, Theory of Probability, Vols. I and 2, A. Machi and A. Smith, translators (Wiley, New York, 1974). [ 24 1 K. Devlin, Logic and Information (Cambridge University Press, New York, 1991). [ 25 I J. Doyle, A truth maintenance system, Artijicial Intelligence 12 ( 1979) 23 l-272; in: M.L. Ginsberg, ed., Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 259- 279. reprinted 1261 J. Doyle, Y. Shoham and M.P. Wellman, A logic of relative desire, in: Z.W. Ras and M. Zemankova, eds., Methodologies for Intelligent Systems: 6th International Symposium. ISMIS-91, Charlotte, NC (Springer, New York, 1991) 16-31. [ 27 I F. Doring, On the probabilities of conditionals, Philos. Reviews 103 ( 1994) 689-700. I28 1 D. Dubois and H. Prade, Fuzzy cardinality and the modeling of imprecise quantification, Fuzzy Sets trnd Systems 16 ( 1985) 199-230. D.G. Schwartz/Art$cial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 161 [ 29 1 D. Dubois and H. Prade, Possibility Theory: An Approach to Computerized Processing of Uncertainty (Plenum Press, New York, 1988). [ 30 1 D. Dubois and H. Prade, On fuzzy syllogisms, Compututioncll Intelligence 4 ( 1988) 17 l- 179. [ 31 1 D. Dubois and H. Prade, Epistemic entrenchment and possibilistic (Research Note), Artificial logic Intelligence 50 (1991) 223-239. I32 1 D. Dubois and H. Prade, Conditional objects and non-monotonic International Conference 175-18.5. (1991) on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning reasoning, in: Proceedings Second (KR-91). Cambridge, MA 1361 I33 1 D. Dubois and H. Prade, Conditioning, in: I.R. Goodman, M.M. Gupta, H.T. Nguyen and G.S. Rogers, eds., Conditional Logic in Expert Systems (Elsevier, New York, 1991) 115-158. logic and nonstandard uncertainty models, nonmonotonic [ 34 1 J.J. Elgot-Drapkin, Step logic: reasoning situated in time, Ph.D. Dissertation, Tech. Rept. CS-TR-2156 and UMIACS-TR-88-94, (1988). Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland. College Park, MD [ 35 1 J.J. Elgot-Drapkin, D. Gordon, S. Kraus, M. Miller, M. Nirke and D. Perlis, Calibrating, Tech. Rept. CS-TR-3279, Department of Computer grouping, counting, Science, University and J. Pollock, eds., Philosophy and AI: Essays at the fnte@ce of in: Proceedings AAAI FalI Symposium on Control of grounding, Maryland, College Park, MD ( 1994); also the Physical World by Intelligent Agents, New Orleans, LA ( 1994) J.J. Elgot-Drapkin, M. Miller and D. Perlis, Life on a desert island: ongoing work on real-time reasoning, in Artificial Intelligence: Proceedings 1987 Workshop (Morgan in: FM. Brown, ed., The Frame Problem Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 349-357. J.J. Elgot-Drapkin, M. Miller and D. Perlis, Memory, Cummins MA, 1991) 79-103. J.J. Elgot-Drapkin Artificial Intelligence 2 (1) D.W. Etherington, More on inheritance distance, D.W. Etherington, Reusoning with Incomplete Information D.W. Etherington, Ford and P.J. Hayes, eds., Reasoning Agents in (1 Dynamic World: The Frame Problem Greenwich, CT, 199 I ) 43-54. D.W. Etherington, (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1988). in: K.M. (JAI Press, in: Proceedings AAAI-87, Seattle, WA ( 1987) 352-357. and D. Perlis, Reasoning (1990) 75-98. in time 1: basic concepts, J. Experimental Theoret. S. Kraus and D. Perlis, Nonmonotonicity reason and time: the step-logic approach, and the scope of reasoning, Artificial S. Kraus and D. Perlis, Limited hierarchies with exceptions: scope and circumscriptive (MIT Press, Cambridge, theories and inferential reasoning. situated default in: R. 1371 1381 I391 1401 141 I I42 I43 144 145 14’5 147 148 in Nonmonofonic Reasoning and R. Reiter, On inheritance hierarchies with exceptions, Intelligence 52 (1991) 221-261, D.W. Etherington Washington, DC (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1983) 104-108; ed., Readings R. Fagin and J.H. Halpem, Belief, awareness and limited reasoning, Artificial 39-76. R. Fagin, J.Y. Halpem. Y. Moses and M.Y. Vardi, Reasoning about Knowledge MA. 1995). R. Fagin, J.Y. Halpem, Y. Moses and M.Y. Vardi, A nonstandard problem, Artificial Intelligence 79 ( 1995) 203-240. SE. Fahlman, NETL: A Sy.stenz for Representing Cambndge, MA, 1979). R.E. Fikes et al. OPUS: a new generation knowledge engineering Phase 2 Interim Report; and Final Report, 1975; El Camino Real West, Mountain View, CA, 1987). approach in: Proceedings AAAI-83, in: M.L. Ginsberg, reprinted fntelligence 34 ( 1988) (MIT Press, Cambridge, to the logical omniscience and Using Real-World Knowledge (MIT Press, for DARPA Contract F30602-85-C-0065 environment: Phase 1 Final Report; Inc., (Intellicorp, (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 10 1- 1 OS. 149 I R.E. Fikes and N.J. Nilsson, STRIPS: a new approach to the application of theorem proving to problem solving, ArtiJcial I SO 1 J.R. Fisher, Experiments Intelligence 2 ( 197 I ) 198-208. refutation using ranked reasoning, Tech. Rept., California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, CA, 1986. I S 1 I K.M. Ford, C. Glymour and P.J. Hayes, eds., Android Epistemology (MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 1995). 162 D.G. Schwartz/Artijiciul Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 IS2 I K.M. Ford and P.J. Hayes, eds., Reusoning Agents in a Dynamic World: The Frame Problem (JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, 199 1). 1.53 I N. Friedman and J.Y. Halpem, Conditional logics of belief change, in: Proceedings A,4.41-94, Seattle, WA (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994) 9 1 S-92 1. IS4 I N. Friedman and J.Y. Halpern, A knowledge-based framework for belief change, Part I: foundations. in: Proceedings 5th Conference on the Theoreticul Aspects of Reusoning ubout Knowledge Pacific Grove, CA (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 1994) 44-64. (TARK-94), 155 I N. Friedman and J.Y. Halpem, A knowledge-based framework for belief change, Part II: revision and update, in: Proceedings 4th internutionul (KR-94), Bonn, Germany ed., Generulized Quunt@ers: Linguistic Conference on the Principles of Knowledge Represent&on (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 1994) 190-201. and Ln,qic,ul Approaches (Reidel, Dordrecht. und Reasoning I 56 I P. Glrdenfors, 1987). IS7 I P. Gardenfors, Knowledge in Flux: Modeling the Dynumics of Epistemic Stares (MIT Press/Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA, 1988). I 58 1 P. Giirdenfors, ed., Belief Revision I 59 I H. Geffner, Dejbult Reasoning: Cuusal und Conditionul I 60 I M.L. Ginsberg, Does probability have a place in non-monotonic Theories (Cambridge University Press, New York, 1992). (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992). in: Proceedings IJCAI-85, reasoning?, Los Angeles, CA ( 1985) 107-I 10. 16 I I M.L. Ginsberg, ed., Reudings 1621 M.L. Ginsberg, Multivalued in Nonmonotonic Reasoning a uniform logics: approach (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987). intelligence, in artificial reasoning to Corfq,utcctioncll Intelligence 4 ( 1988) 265-3 16. I63 I J. Gurney, D. Perlis and K. Purang, Active logic and Heim’s rules for updating discourse context, in: Proceedings IJCAI-95, Workshop on Context I64 I J. Gurney, K. Purang and D. Perlis, Interpreting presuppositions in Nuturul Language, Montreal, Que. ( 1995). using active logic: from contexts to utterances, Compututionul Intelligence [ 65 1 J.Y. Halpem, An analysis of first-order 166 I J.Y. Halpem and D.A. McAllester, Likelihood. probability, and knowledge, Compututionul (to appear). logics of probability, Artificiul Inrelligence 46 ( 1990) 3 I l-350. Intelligence 5 (1989) 151-160. I67 1 J.Y. Halpem and M.O. Rabin. A logic to reason about likelihood, Art&G1 Intelligence 32 ( 1987) 379-40s. I68 I S. Hanks and D. McDermott, Modeling a dynamic and uncertain world 1: symbolic and probabilistic reasoning about change, Artificiul Intelligence I69 1 PJ. Hayes, The frame problem and related problems 66 ( 1994) l-55. intelligence, in artificial (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco/Elsevier in: A. Elithom and D. Science, Amsterdam, Jones, eds., Art$cial 1973) 45-59. and Humun Thinking I70 I P.J. Hayes, The naive physics manifesto I, in: D. Michie, ed., Expert Systems in the Microelectronic Age (Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1978). 17 1 I P.J. Hayes, The logic of frames, in: D. Metzing, ed., Frume Conceptions and Text Understunding (Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1980) 46-61. ( 72 1 P.J. Hayes, The second naive physics manifesto, in: J.R. Hobbs and R.C. Moore, eds., Formul Theories of the Common Sense World (Ablex, Nonvood, NJ. 1985) l-36. [ 73 I P.J. Hayes, What the frame problem is and isn’t, in: Z.W. Pylyshyn, ed., The Robot’s Dilemmu: The Frume Problem in Artijicial Intelligence ( Ablex, Nonvood, NJ, 1987) 123-l 37. I74 I PJ. Hayes, The frame problem in histories (Abstract), Art$ciul Intelligence: Proceedings I987 Workshop in: EM. Brown, ed., The Frame Problem (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 31. in I75 1 P.J. Hayes and K. Ford, Turing test considered harmful, in: Proceeding.? IJCAI-9.5, Montreal, Que. ( 1995) 972-977. I76 I A. Heyting, I77 I J. Hintikka, Knowledge und Belief (Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1962). [ 78 I J.F. Horty and R.H. Thomason, Mixing strict and defeasible (North-Holland, Amsterdam, An Introduction inheritance, Intuitionism: 1956). in: Proceedings AAAI-88, St. Paul, MN ( 1988) 427-432. 1791 J.F. Horty, R.H. Thomason semantic networks. Arti$ciul and D.S. Touretzky, A skeptical theory of inheritance in nonmonotonic intelligence 42 ( 1990) 31 l-348. 1801 G.E. Hughes and M.J. Cresswell, An Introduction to Modul Logic (Methuen, London, 1968). D.G. SchwarMArtijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 163 18 1 1 H.A. Kautz and B. Selman, Hard problems logics, Conference on Principles of Knowledge Represenmtion and Reasoning Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1989) 189-197. for simple default in: Proceedings 1st Interntrtionul (KR-89), Toronto, Ont. (Morgan [ 821 H.J. Keisler, Probability quantifiers, in: J. Barwise and S. Feferman. eds., Model-Theoretic Lo#c,s (Springer, New York, 1985) 509-556. 183 1 M. Kim and A.S. Maida, Reliability measure a nonmonotonic semantics, IEEE Trans. Know/edge and Data Engineering 184 1 A.N. Kolmogorov, Foundarions 1956). theory: 5 ( 1) ( 1993) 41-5 I. of the Theory of Probtrhility (Chelsea, New York, 2nd English ed., [ 85 1 S. Kripke, A completeness [ 86 ] S. Kripke, Semantical I87 1 B.J. Kuipers, A.J. Moskowitz and J.P. Kassirer. Critical decisions under uncertainty: in modal logic, J. Symbolic Logic 24 ( 19.59) 1-14. on modal logic, Acta Phi/ax Fenn. 16 ( 1963) 83-94. theorem considerations representation and structure, Cognitive Sci. 12 ( 1988) 177-2 10. I 88 I H.E. Kyburg, Probability and the Logic of Rational Belief (Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, CT, 1961). I89 ] H.E. Kyburg, The LoKicalfixuzdations I90 I H.E. Kyburg, Knowledge Representation I91 I E Lehmann, ed., Semantic Nenuorks in Artijicial I92 I (2.1. Lewis and C.H. Langford, Symbolic Logic 193 I D.K. Lewis, Probabilities of conditionals of Stafistical Inference (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1974). and Defensible Reasoning (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990) intelligence (Pergamon Press, New York, 1992). (The Century Company, 1932). reprinted PhiLox Reviews 85 (1976) 297-315; Beliefs, Decision. Chance and Time (Reidel, Dordrecht, in: D.K. Lewis, Pllilosc~phic~cll Papers 2 (Oxford University Press, Oxford, England, 1986) 133-156; also in: F. Jackson. ed., Conditionals (Oxford University Press, Oxford, England, 1991) 76-101. and G. Pearce, eds., 01~: Condition&, 1981) 129-147; with a postscript in: W.L. Harper, R. Stalnaker and conditional probabilities, 1941 L. Li and J.H. You, Making default inferences from logic programs, Conlputarional Intelligence 7 (1991) 142-153. 195 I V. Lifschitz, Computing circumscription. Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1985) 121-127: Reasoniq (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 167-173. in: M.L. Ginsberg, ed., Readings in: Proceedings reprinted IJCAI-85, Los Angeles, CA (Morgan in Nonmonotonic [ 96 I V. Lifschitz, Pointwise circumscription, Stanford Preprint; reprinted in: M.L. Ginsberg, ed., Readings i,l Nonmonotonic Reasonitq (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 179- 193. I97 I V. Lifschitz, (Preliminary 364-368. Circumscriptive logic-based theories: A in: 6th Nat. Conference on Art$cicd report) framework representation Intelligence, AAAI-87, Seattle, WA ( 1987) for knowledge I98 I V. Lifschitz, Between circumscription and autoepistemic logic, Cot!ference on Principles of Knowledge Represent&ion Kaufmann. San Mateo, CA, 1989) 235-244. and Reasoning in: Proceedings fsr (KR-89). Toronto, Ont. (Morgan International I99 I J. McCarthy, Programs with common sense, in: M.L. Minsky, Sernanlic Irformution Processins (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1968) 403-418. I 100 I J. McCarthy, Circumscription-a 171-172; 27-39, reprinted Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 145-152. in: M.L. Ginsberg, form of nonmonotonic reasoning, Arrificial Intelligence ed., Rendiqs in Nonmonotonic Reasoning 13 ( 1980) (Morgan I 101 I J. McCarthy, Applications of circumscription to formalizing common-sense knowledge, Ar@ial InfeUijience 28 ( 1986) 89-1 16; reprinted (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 153-166. in: M.L. Ginsberg, ed., Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning Artificial I 102 I J. McCarthy, The frame problem Proceediqs Intellijiencet I I03 1 J. McCarthy, History of circumscription, I 104 I J. McCarthy and P.J. Hayes, Some philosophical today Ar@cial 1987 Workshop in: B. Meltzer and D. Michie. eds., Machine Scotland, (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 26-45; also Se,xe: Papers by John McCarthy 1969) 463-502; reprinted problems Inrelligence in: M.L. Ginsberg, I 105 I D. McDermott. Non-monotonic logic-II. J. ACM 29 (1982) 33-57. (Ablex, Norwood, NJ, 1990) 21-63. (abstract only), in: EM. Brown, ed., The Frame Problem (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 3. in Intelligence 59 ( 1993) 23-26. from the standpoint of artificial intelligence, 4 (Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, ed., Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning in: V. Lifschitz, ed., Formalizing Conlrnon 164 D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 I1061 D. McDermott, We’ve been framed: or, why AI is innocent of the frame problem, ed., The Robot’s Dilemma: The Frame Problem 113-122. in Artijicial Intelligence in: Z.W. Pylyshyn, (Ablex, Norwood, NJ, 1987) I 107 I D. McDermott and J. Doyle, Non-monotonic logic--I, Artificial in: M.L. Ginsberg, 1987) I1 t-126. ed., Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning Intelligence reprinted 13 ( 1980) 41-72; (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, ] 108 ] V. McGee, Conditional probabilities and compounds of conditionals, Philosopical Reviews 98 ( 1989) 485-541. [ 109 I M.J. Miller, A view of one’s past and other aspects of reasoned change in belief, Ph.D. Dissertation, and UMIACS-TR-93-66, Department of Computer Science, University of Tech. Rept. CS-TR-3107 Maryland, College Park, MD ( 1993). fuzzy triviality: I I 101 P Mime, Avoiding implications and conditional events, Internar. J. Approximate Reasoning 15 (1996) 123-143. [ I I I 1 J. Minker and D. Perlis, Computing protected circumscription, J. Logic Programming 2 ( 1985) 235- 249. [ 112 ] M. Minsky, A framework for representing knowledge, in: PH. Winston, ed., The Psychology oj Computer Vision Metzing, ed., Frame Conceptions and Text Understanding New York, 1975) 21 l-277; (McGraw-Hill, 1 I 13 1 M. Mizumoto, S. Fukami and K. Tanaka, Fuzzy conditional a condensed version appeared in: D. (Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1980) inferences and fuzzy inferences with fuzzy I-25. quantifiers, in: Proceedings IJCAI-79, Tokyo, Japan (1979) 589-591. logic, [ I 14 I R.C. Moore, Semantical considerations [ I IS I R.C. Moore, Autoepistemic Standard Logicsfor 1 I I6 I R.C. Moore, Autoepistemic [ 1 17 I F. Mosteller and C. Youtz, Quantifying [ I 18 I A. Mostowski, On a generalization [ I 19 I R. Nado and R.E. Fikes, Semantically Automated Reasoning on nonmonotonic intelligence 25 ( 1985) 75-94. in: P. Smets, E.H. Mamdani, D. Dubois and H. Prade, eds., Non- (Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1988) 10% 136. logic, Artijicial logic revisited, Artificial probabilistic intelligence expressions, Statist. Sci. 5 ( 1990) 2-34. 59 ( 1993) 27-30. of quantifiers, Fund. Math. 44 ( 1957) 12-36. sound inheritance for a formally defined frame language with defaults, in: Proceedings AAAI-87, Seattle, WA ( 1987) 443-448. ] 1201 H. Narazaki and I.B. Turksen, A decision-making approach to a syllogistic reasoning problem with consistency maintenance in a knowledge base, in: Proceedings 2nd IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FLUZIEEEE-93), San Francisco, CA ( 1993) 76-8 I. [ I21 I H. Narazaki and LB. Turksen, An integrated approach for syllogistic reasoning and knowledge consistency level maintenance, IEEE Trans. Systems Man Cybernet. 24 (4) ( 1994) 548-563. I22 1 A. Nerode, W. Marek and VS. Subrahmanian, eds., Logic Programming and Non-Monotonic Reasoning: Proceedings 1st International Workshop (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 199 I ) as fuzzy concepts, in: T. Z&Cnyi, ed.. Fuzzy Sets in Psychology (Elsevier 123 ] S.E. Newstead, Quantifiers Science, Amsterdam, I24 1 N.J. Nilsson, Probabilistic 1988) 51-72. logic, Arfihcial fnfelligence 28 ( 1986) 7 l-87; reprinted in: G. Shafer and J. Pearl, eds., Readings 125 1 M. Nirke, S. Kraus and D. Perlis, Thinking (Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1990) 680-688. in time, Tech. Rept. CS-TR-3249, University of Maryland, College Park, MD (1994); also in: Proceedings Bar time: a modal active-logic in Uncertain Reasoning for reasoning takes llan Symposium on Foundations of Artijicial Intelligence I26 I M. Nirke, S. Kraus and D. Perlis, Fully deadline-coupled (BISFAI-95) planning: one step at a time, in: Proceedings ( 1995). 6th International Symposium on Methodologiesfitr Intelligent Systems, Charlotte, NC ( I99 I ) 127 ] M. Nirke, D. Perlis and S. Kraus, Reasoning about change in a changing world, in: Proceedings Florida Al Research Symposium (FLAIRS-93), Fort Lauderdale, FL ( 1993). 1281 D. Nute, Defeasible logic and the frame problem, in: H.E. Kyburg Jr, R.P. Loui and G.N. Carlson, eds., Knowledge Representation and Defeasible Reasoning (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990) 3-2 1. 129 1 D. Nute, A decidable quantified defeasible logic, in: D. Prawitz, B. Skyrms and D. Westerstahl, eds., Logic, Methodology 1301 D. Nute, Basic defeasible and Philosophy of Science IX (Elsevier, New York, 1994) 263-284. lntensional in: L.F. de1 Cerro and M. Penttonen, logic, eds., Logics .for Programming (Clarendon Press, Oxford, England, 1992) 125- 154. 131 1 D. Nute, Defeasible logic, in: D. Gabbay and C. Hogger, eds., Handbook of Logic in Artihcial Intelligence and Logic Pro~ramnzing, Vol. 111 (Oxford University Press, New York, 1993) 353-395. D.G. Schwartz/Artificial Intelligence 93 (19971 103-167 165 [ 132 1 .I. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks cf Plausible Inference (Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1988). ( I33 1 J. Pearl, System Z: a natural ordering of defaults with tractable applications to default reasoning, in: M. Vardi, ed., Proceedings 3rd Conference on Theoretical Aspects of Reusoning ubout Knowledge (TARK-90) [ I341 D. Perlis, On the consistency (Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1990) 121-135. of commonsense reasoning, Computational Intelligence 2 ( 1986) I80- 190; reprinted Altos, CA, 1987) 56-66. in: M.L. Ginsberg, ed., Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning (Morgan Kaufmann, Los [ 135 1 D. Perlis, Circumscribing with sets, Art$cial [ 136 1 D. Perlis, Autocircumscription, [ I37 ] D. Perlis, Circumscription, Artificial Infelligence in: Encyclopedia of Artificial lnfelligence 36 ( 1988) 223-236. Intelligence 31 ( 1987) 201-21 I. (Wiley, New York, 2nd ed., 1992) 164-168. [ 138 1 D. Perlis, J.J. Elgot-Drapkin and M. Miller, Stop the world-1 want to think, Tech. Rept. CS-TR-2415 and UMIACS-TR-90-26, Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD ( 1990) ; also in: K. Ford and F. Anger, eds.. Internat. J. Intelligent Systems 6 ( 199 1) 443-456, Special Issue on Temporal Reasoning. [ I39 1 D. Perlis and J. Minker, Completeness for circumscription, 28 ( 1986) Intelligence Artificial results 29-42. I1401 D. Perlis and K. Purang, Conversational adequacy: Mistakes are the essence, Workshop on Detecting, Repairing and Preventing Human-Machine (1996). Miscommuniccltion, in: Proceedings AAAf Portland, OR [ 141 I P.L. Peterson, On the logic of “few”, “many”, and “most”, Notre Danre J. Formal Logic XX ( 1979) 155-179. [ 142 1 J.L. Pollock, Defeasible [ 143 I J.L. Pollock, How to reason defeasibly, Artijciul [ 144 I J.L. Pollock, Cognitive Carpentry: A Blueprinf reasoning, Cognitive Sci. 11 ( 1987) 48 I-5 18. Intelligence 57 ( 1992) l-42. for How to Build a Person (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995). [ 145 I D.L. Poole. A logical [ 146 1 D.L. Poole, What the lottery paradox framework for default reasoning, Artificial Intelligence 36 ( 1988) 27-48. tells us about default reasoning, in: Proceedings (KR-89), Toronto, Ont. (Morgan fst lnternutional Conference ot! Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning Kaufmann. San Mateo, CA, 1989) 333-340. I 1471 K. Purang, D. Perlis and J. Gurney, Active logic applied to cancellation Proceedings AAAI Spring Symposium on Computational Implicature, [ 148 I Z.W. Pylyshyn, ed., The Robot’s Dilemma: The Frame Problem Norwood, NJ, 1987). of Gricean Stanford, CA ( 1996). Intelligence in Artificial implicature, in: (Ablex, I 149 I EP. Ramsey, The Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays (K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., London, England, I I SO I R. Reiter, A logic for default Ginsberg, ed., Readings I93 1). reasoning, Artificial in Nonmonotonic Reasoning Intelligence in: M.L. (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) 68-93. 13 ( 1980) 81-132; reprinted [ 15 I I N. Rescher, A probabilistic I IS2 I E. Rich, Default reasoning as likelihood approach to modal logic, Acta Philos. Fenn. XVI ( 1963) 2 15-226. reasoning, in: Proceedings AAAI-83, Washington, DC ( 1983) 348-351. I I53 I E. Sandewall, An approach eds., Machine Intelligence to the frame problem and its implementation, 7 (Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1972) 195-204. in: B. Meltzer and D. Michie, I IS4 I E. Sandewall, Nonmonotonic fEEE 74 (1986) 1345-1353. inference rules for multiple inheritance systems with exceptions, in: Proc. I IS5 I E. Sandewall, The range of applicability of nonmonotonic logics for the inertia problem, in: Proceedings IJCAI-93, Chambery, France (1993) 738-743. I 1561 B. Selman Intelligence and H.J. Levesque, The complexity 62 ( 1993) 303-339. of path-based defeasible inheritance, Artifcial I I57 I Y. Shoham, Chronological ignorance: time, nonmonotonicity, necessity and causal theories, in: Proceedings AAAI-86, Philadelphia, PA ( 1986) 389-393. I I58 I Y. Shoham, Reusoning about Change: Time and Causation (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1988). from the Standpoint ofArtificial Inte/ligerlce 166 D.G. Schwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 I59 1 Y. Shoham, Agent-oriented 160 I Y. Shoham and M. Tennenholtz, On social programming, Artificial Intelligence 60 ( 1993) 5 l-92. laws for artificial agent societies: off-line design, Ar/ijicial intelligence 73 (1995) 231-252. I6 I I G.R. Simari and R.l? Loui, A mathematical 53 ( 1992) 125 157. Intelligence Artijicial treatment of defeasible reasoning and its implementation, I 162 I G. Simonet, On Sandewall’s fntelligence exception, Arti’cial paper: nonmonotonic 86 ( 1996) 3.59-374. inference rules for multiple inheritance with I I63 I B. Smith and G. Kelleher, eds., Reason Maintenance Systems and their Applications (Ellis Horwood, Chichester, England, 1988). [ 164 1 L. Sombe, Reasoning under Incomplete It@mation in Artijicial Intelligence: A Comparison of Formalisms Using a Single Example (Wiley, New York, 1990); also appeared as: Internat. J. Intelligen/ Systems 5 ( 1990). [ 16.5 I J.F. Sowa, Conceptuul Structures: Itformation Processing in Mind and Machine (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1984). I 166 I J.F. Sowa. ed., Principles oj Semuntic Networks: Explorations in the Representation of Knowledge ( Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 199 I ) and conditionals, I 167 I R.C. Stalnaker, Probability in: W.L. Harper, R. Stalnaker and G. Pearce, eds., !fs: Conditionals, I 168 1 L.A. Stein, Resolving (1992) 259-310. Beliefi% Decision, Chance and Time (Reidel, Dordrecht, in nonmonotonic inheritance ambiguity I98 I ) IO7- 128. hierarchies, Artijicial fntelligence 55 [ I69 I G.T. Stump, The interpretation [ I70 I A. Thayse, From Modal Logic 1 I71 I H. Thiele, On fuzzy quantifiers, of frequency adjectives, Linguistics to Deductive Dataha.ces (Wiley, New York, 1989). and Ph~Iosophy 4 ( 1980) 221-257. in: Proceedings 5th International Fuzzy sytems Association World Con,gress (IFSA-93), Seoul, South Korea ( 1993) 39.5-398. and M. Kifer, A theory of nonmonotonic inheritance based on annotated logic, Art$cial 1 172 1 K. Thirunarayan Intelligence 60 ( 1993) 23-50. 1 173 I R.H. Thomason, NETL and subsequent path-based inheritance theories, Cornput. Muth. Appl. 23 ( 1992) 179-204. [ 1741 J.A. Toth, Book Review of: Reasoning Agents in a Dynamic World: The Fume Problem (K.M. Ford and PJ. Hayes, eds.), Arti’cial Intelligence 73 ( 1995) 323-369. I 17.5 I D.S. Touretzky, Implicit ordering of defaults in inheritance systems, in: Proceedings AAAI-84, Austin, TX (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1984) 322-325: reprinted in: M.L. Ginsberg, ed., Readings in Normlonoronic Reasoning J. Pearl, eds., Readings (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1987) (Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1990) 668-67 lO6- 109; also in: G. Shafer and I. in Uncertain Reasoning 1 I76 I D.S. Touretzky, T/re Mathematics 177 1 D.S. Touretzky, J.E. Horty and R.H. Thomason, A clash of intuitions: oj lnheritunce Systems (Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1986). the current state of nonmonotonic multiple inheritance I78 1 A.M. Turing, Computing machinery systems, in: Proceedings IJCAI-87, Milan, Italy ( 1987) 476-482. and intelligence, Mind 59 ( 1950) 433-460. I 1 179 I J. van Benthem, Modal Logic and Classical Logic (Bibliopolis, Napoli, 1983). 1801 J. van Benthem, Questions about quantifiers, J. Symbolic Logic 49 ( 1984) 443-466. I8 I I J. van Benthem, Essnys 182 I J. van Benthem, Towards a computational in Logical Semcmtics (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1986). semantics. Linguistic and Logical Approaches (Reidel, Dordrecht, in: P Gardenfors, 1987). 3 I-7 I. ed., Generalized Quantifiers: I83 I J. van Benthem, A Manual of‘ Intensional Logic (Center for the Study of Language and Jnformation (CLSI), Stanford CA, 2nd ed., 1988). 1841 J. van Benthem and A. ter Meulen, eds., Genercllized Quant$iers in Natural Language (Foris Publications, Dordrecht, 1984). [ 185 1 J. van Eijck, Generalized quantifiers and traditional logic, in: J. van Benthem and A. ter Meulen, eds., Genurtrlized Quantifiers in Natural Language (Foris Publications, Dordrecht, 1984) l-19. II86 1 T.S. Wallsten, D.V. Budescu, A. Rapoport, R. Zwick and B. Forsythe, Measuring terms, J. Experimenfal Psychology: General 115 ( 1986) 348-365. of probability the vague meanings II87 I T.S. Wallsten, D.W. Budescu and R. Zwick, Comparing the calibration and coherence of numerical and verbal probability judgments, Management Sci. 39 ( 1993) 176-l 90. D.G. Schwartz/Artijicial Intelligence 93 (1997) 103-167 167 1 I88 l T. Whalen and B. Schott, Usuality, regularity and fuzzy set logic, /nfernccf. .I. Appmxinzate Retrsoning 6 (1992) 481-504. [ 189 1 S. Wrobel, Concept Formatior~ and Knowledge Revision [ I90 1 R.R. Yager, Quantified propositions logic. in a linguistic (Khmer, Dordrecht, 1994). Internat. J. Man-Machine Studies 19 ( 1983) 195-227. 1 I9 I 1 R.R. Yager, Quantifiers in the formulation of multiple objective decision functions, Infi~mr. Sci. 31 (1983) 1077139. 1 192 1 R.R. Yager, Reasoning with fuzzy quantified 1 I93 1 R.R. Yager, Reasoning with fuzzy quantified 1 1941 R.R. Yager, On ordered weighted averaging operators statements: Part 1, Kybernetes 14 ( 1985) 233-240. statements: Part II, Kybernetes 15 ( 1986) Ii I-120. in multi-criteria decision making, IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 18 ( 1988) 183-190. 1 I95 I R.R. Yager, Connectives I 196 1 R.R. Yager, Interpreting and quantifiers linguistically in fuzzy sets, Fuz_zy Set.7 and Systems 40 ( I99 1) 39-75. quantified propositions, Tech. Rept. MB-1 117, Machine Intelligence Institute, Iona College, New Rochelle, NY ( 1992). I 197 I R.R. Yager, Families of OWA operators, Fuzz,~ Sets and Systems 59 ( 1993) 125-148. I 19X I R.K. Yager, S. Ovchinnikov, R.M. Tong and H.T. Nguyen, eds., Fu77.y Sets and Applicatmns: Selected Papers br LA. Zadeh (Wiley, New York, 1987). 1 I99 1 L.A. Zadeh, Fuzzy logic and approximate reasoning (in memory of Grigore Moisil) Syuhese 30 (1975) 407-428. I200 I L.A. Zadeh, The concept of a linguistic variable and its application to approximate reasoning. Part I, Ir@~m~. SC!. 8 (1975) 199-249; Part II. hform. Sci. 8 (1975) 301-357; Part III, Infium. Sci. 9 (1975) in: R.R. Yager, S. Ovchinnikov, R.M. Tong and H.T. Nguyen, eds., FLIZZ~ Ser.7 and 43-80; reprinted Applications: Selected Papers by L.A. Zcdeh (Wiley, New York, 1987) 2 19-269.27 l-327, 329-366. [ 20 I 1 L.A. Zadeh, PRUF-A meaning language for natural languages, Internat. J. Man- Mnc,hirte Studies 10 ( 1978) 395-460; Nguyen, eds.. Fuzzy Sets arld Applications: 4999568. representation reprinted in: R.R. Yager, S. Ovchinnikov, R.M. Tong and H.T. Selected Papers by L.A. Zadeh (Wiley, New York, 1987) 1202 / L.A. Zadeh, A computational approach to fuzzy quantifiers in natural languages, Conr~~~r. and Mar/t. 9 (1983) 149-184. 1203 1 L.A. Zadeh, Fuzzy probabilities, I204 I L.A. Zadeh, Syllogistic reasoning fnformation Processing and Manu~ement 20 ( 1984) 363-372. in fuzzy logic and its application IEEE Trans. Systems, Man and Cybernetics 15 ( 1985) 754-763; dispositions, S. Ovchinnikov, R.M. Tong and H.T. Nguyen, eds., Fuzzy Sets and Applications: /..A. Zndeh (Wiley, New York, 1987) 443-466. to usuality and reasoning with in: R.R. Yager, reprinted Selected Papers by I205 I L.A. Zadeh, Outline of a theory of usuality based on fuzzy logic, in: A. Jones, A. Kaufmann and H.-J. Zimmerman, eds., Fuzzy Sets Theory and Appplications (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1986) 79-97. 1206 I L.A. Zadeh and R.E. Bellman, Local and fuzzy logics, in: J.M. Dunn and G. Epstein, eds., Modern Uses of Multiple-Valued (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1977) 103-165. [ 207 I A.C. Zimmer, Schemata [ 208 I A.C. Zimmer. What uncertainty reasoning, Gesfrrlt T/leery 7 ( 1985) 155-169. judgements can tell about the underlying Logic in everyday L.N. Kanal and J.F. Lemmer, eds.. Unc~ertain~ 1986) 249-2.58. irl Arti’cicd Intelligence subjective probabilities, (Elsevier Science. Amsterdam, in: I209 I A.C. Zimmer. A fuzzy model for the accumulation and A. Mital, eds., Applications 1986). qf’Fu7y Set Theoy of judgements by human experts, in: W. Karwowski in Human Factors (Elsevier Science. Amsterdam. ( 2 IO I A.C. Zimmer, A common framework for colloquial quantifiers and probability terms, in: T. Z&Cnyi, ed., Fuzz.y Sets in Ps.ychology [ 21 1 I R. Zwick, D.V. Budescu (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, and T.S. Wallsten, An empirical in: T. Z&Cnyi, ed.. Fw.~y Sets in Psychology 1988) 73-89. study of (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, integration the of linguistic 1988) probabilities, 91-12s. 12 12 I Ii. Zwick and T.S. Wallsten, Combining stochastic uncertainty and linguistic inexactness: Theory and experimental 69-111. evaluation of four fuzzy probability models, Internat. J. Man-Machine Studies 30 ( 1989) 