Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 Artificial Intelligence From environments to representations- a mathematical theory of artificial perceptions * Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski a,*, D. Lehmann b a Typographics Ltd.. 46 Hehalutz Street, Jerusalem 96222, Israel ’ Institute of Computer Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Jerusalem 91904, Israel Received 27 November 1996: received in revised form 18 December 1997 Abstract usually Perception and events impressions. of elements is the recognition in the environment, through integration of sensory It is considered here as a broad, high-level, object centered, phenomenon which happens at and above the level of holistic recognition of objects and events, where semantics begin to play a role. We propose and develop a mathematical theory of artificial perceptions. A basic mathematical category is defined. Its objects are perceptions, consisting of world elements, connotations, and a three-valued true, false, undefined predicative correspondence between them. Morphisms describe paths between perceptions. This structure mathematical of AI such as the diversity and embodiment of artificial perceptions. certain intuitive pre-theoretical agent’s perceptual grasp, about transition between various perceptions, etc. Mathematical methods are used to formalize reasonable ways to go about producing a meaningful cognitive from every perception. 0 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. of the environment conceptions about perception, about improving and/or completing an tools and image serves as premises theory. The theory provides rigorous tools of scrutiny that deal with fundamental for a issues It extends and systematizes Keywords: Mathematical foundations of AI; Artificial perception and cognition; Categorical formalizations in AI 1. Introduction The science of Artificial Intelligence artificial agents to the environment to bring about “intelligent” effects. Those effects are typically conceives and constructs autonomous intelligent related is marked by quick active of the artificial agent. Intelligence i‘ There is no intention to deal with human perceptual or cognitive processes. Any anthropomorphisms or human analogs used in this study are for intuitive purposes only, to make the presentation more vivid and readable. * Corresponding author. Email: zippie@actcom.co.il. 0004.3702/98/$19.00 PII: SOOO4-3702(98)00061-7 0 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 188 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. tihmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 and events impressions. of elements and understanding. cognitive behavior in the environment, The essential core of autonomous is is the integration of It is considered here as a broad, high-level, phenomenon, which It is object centered of objects, where perception thus the integration of sensing, perceiving and representing. High-level perception recognition sensory resides higher and therefore semantics begin to play a role. The raw materials of high-level perception are connotations entities. At that point perception needs to produce of wholesome and to use it for a logical, coherent and meaningful various cognitive than pixels on the screen or waveforms of sound. it happens at and above the level of holistic recognized environmental of the environment representation recognition through usually tasks. In [48] Newell states that perception is an area which should definitely be covered things, . . . facilities the environment life long Cumputer is needed for an agent . . perceptual processing to get information about . ability to learn to develop existence. They would have, among other since cognitive behavior to work is a function of the environment. by theories of cognition, towards what he calls Hubile Systems: programs In [50], Nilsson proposes competence. The abilities of such systems should “. . include of general, humanlike, in which whatever and for receiving, understanding, it operates . . “. This direction was already suggested generating communications.. Individuals who should in [49] where Nilsson proposed a (constantly have a continuing changing) model of the world, they would benefit from their experiences, and they would communicate with other agents, artificial or human. These agents could do anything that that requires moving around environment from their own experience which draws upon their own sensory-motor-neural In planning such an agent, one cannot separate cognition, functions and the tools it offers may constitute basic artificial treatment of various perceptual transition and comparison perceptual grasp, joint perceptions, reasoning (i.e., problem where the separate processes enhance one another rather then interfere with one another. image of their environment, and their own experience. from all these capabilities: theory of artificial perceptions the challenge of general treatment provides a single context for the among other things, a and completing and higher theory, from higher-level should cooperate. The proposed mathematical between different perceptions, and a bridge improving that integrates perception solving, decision making etc.). This warrants a unified they would, in time, develop their own individual reasoning, and from the communication in some way. By having a continuing in and sensing a real environment intelligence. The mathematical a step towards achieving and cognitive processes, the sensory-motor-neural existence and learning and manipulating capabilities including, apparatus Artificial agents may collect information apparatus. This information motor-neural way. The collecting of the information, by this work as arti$cial perception. The raw internal any way to represent serving as the basis for further, higher level reasoning processes. the agent’s own cognitive about their environment using their sensory- is then reflected inside the artificial agent in some is conceived together with its internal reflection, reflection could then be arranged in image of its environment, the arrangement structure A mathematical proposed formalization meticulously system is general enough is proposed which provides standard mathematical artificial perception. This tools of scrutiny, SO that one can in the domain of artificial perceptions. The proposed to formalize a wide spectrum of artificial perceptions. Any such formalizes perform and analyze Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /ArtiJcial Intelligence 102 (199X) 187-247 189 through reflecting perception usually has its own sensory-motor-neural internally modules. The generality correspondence mechanisms the output which emerges from this apparatus and its own method of into the agent’s internal is achieved via a categorization which is able to accommodate any between an external environment Many things seem to happen from the moment a phenomenon and an internal reflection of it. comes in the environment it is processed and eventually by innate mechanisms its perception by the agent, and until to being, leaves its mark on the agent’s cognition. The things which happen at the early stages of and equipment. this chain of events are typically predetermined to perceive These are formalized by the perception predicate. The agent is constructed world elements (the exact nature of these concepts will be explained soon). The connotations of every w-element are apparatus. As an example from determined primarily by the built-in sensory-motor-neural textures and other outside humans, phenomena and socio-cultural influences. For artificial agents, programming may stand for the latter ones in their broadest sense. tastes, sounds, smells, primarily by our neurophysiology, for short) and to reflect them with connotations the way we perceive colors, plus our experience is determined (w-elements The later stages of the perceptual chain of processing the artificial agent now has the connotations of its w-elements, things internally. There would usually be room for a contingent perceptual-cognitive feature, on the other hand, more apparent flexibility: and is free to manipulate course of action. That is where programmable, processes come in. These such as: in this are the processes with which this study is concerned. One asks questions given perceptual situation, can one detect lawlike orders and patterns of connotations? Are there redundant them for the benefit of future reasoning processes? Tools are proposed with which the agent may give its own, to these problems. of the informed, solutions given situation. image of its environment. The entire process is It creates its own cognitive based only on information provided by the lower, embodied There are debates as to how much of the intelligent, connotations? What is the best way to arrange obtain a representation cognitive, processing It can systematically level. the symbolic, of perception conscious is flexible enough level (see, for example, to accommodate lower- and higher-level processes. lies below [34]). Our proposed location of the any It presents an abstract concept integrated and thus permits at the basic perception the introduction of either simple or more level. and results are operated within a mathematical All the definitions, constructions This ensures a tidy treatment and thus communicates tools of mathematical hopefully be used and further applied for research in these related domains. that are meticulously rigor and results and introduces stated. These system. to the related domains tools could and/or above formalization separation between of perception, connotations 2. Pre-theoretical and methodological considerations This work presents and applies a mathematical perception and related cognitive processes. Mathematical primitives grounding of artificial systems are based on semantic independent. However, there is more than often an intuitive semantic primitives. This applies to this work where the formal that are context for mathematical system for the formalization 190 Z. Arzi-Goncxmnwki, D. Lehmann /Arfijcial Intellipm 102 (1998) 187-247 system is grounded intuitions and their background. intuitively in a perceptual, cognitive environment. We first discuss these 2. I. Diversity of perceptions that it is We are dealing with an artificial agent that perceives placed next to a box, and that it has the sensory-motor-neural the contents of the box. Someone asks the agent whether the box is full. Some of the following problems may arise: its environment. Assume to determine capabilities - The agent may or may not have been programmed, according to its purposes, to consider a box full of air as full. - It may or may not have been programmed - What if the box is full of waste-paper, which could be disposed of. Is such a box to consider a half full box as full. considered full? - The agent might have no “idea of fullness”. It may or may not have other notions such as “filled” or “empty”, but does not recognize “full”. - Finally, the agent may not perceive “a box”, but rather six elements which form the sides of the box. Indeed, perception the agent, its history and experience, images, and to organize into different elements, list of AI-related works Some extreme and [45]. AI has to deal with artificial agents Their hardware conceived and programmed conceptualizations is different, intriguing and on other capacities individuals apparatus of and cognition do depend on the sensory-motor-neural to perceive, to form mental could break the same reality as their properties. A partial to name just a few. in them internally. Different and choose different uniformities that touch on this issue examples of cases of human perceptions is [7,30,35,38], are given that do not even share the same architecture. their sensory-motor-neural apparatus varies, and they are for different purposes by different people who build their own into the system, each using his own encoding. 2.2. Categorization of perceptions Given the diversity of artificial perceptions, the question is how one can account for such a diversity, yet at the same time formalize a theory of it. Our solution of perceptions. is in the categorization in science introduced to cognitive The philosophical idea of categorization was (see [38]). A simple example the 18th century by [31]. It is Immanuel Kant, in his statement “Grounding for the Metaphysics ofMoruls” is the category of cups. Cups central in common. The agent can come in many shapes and forms, but they all have something then creates out of this “cuphood” a mental image of a cup, an abstract cup that does not match any particular cup from the category. The agent also has general motor actions for dealing with real instances of cups. It is generally agreed that humans are endowed with natural talents for categorization, whereas the task seems hard for artificial perceptions. In that case we should be able to categorize artificial perceptions: we should recognize the essence of artificial perception, image of it. This formal, abstract, perception should not match any particular perception, yet we shall have the tools and we should create a formal Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski. D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 191 for dealing with all perceptions. since here we do not enjoy the advantage of having its reality given in experience In Kant’s words, this should be done . . . entirely a priori, . . . The abstract construct which idea of a perception will be postulated as a mathematical relates between phenomena outside the artificial agent, a set of world elements (w-elements to the artificial agent, a set of connotations. for short), and reflections which are internal World elements exist independently of any thought or perception. Anything which exists independent of the artificial agent, and could perhaps be discerned by it, is a legitimate w-element. Possible example w-elements are a face, a light blow of wind, the shadow of a smile, a slight shivering of voice, a tinge of smell or taste or color, etc. Not every sensory- motor-neural mechanism and even if it does it may not attach the same connotations might break the same reality Although is subjective. to them. Furthermore, different perceptions into different parts to serve as wholesome w-elements. into w-elements the external environment has an objective existence, is able to discern every such outside phenomenon, its division The term connotation was chosen (rather than “attribute” or “property”) to stress the iconic. is more personal experience, and to subtle distinctions. to the agent’s own individual, is the mother of invention”. Connotations term of “mother” may or may not come connotations affinity than just a primary meaning. As an example, on top It is a meaning which of the conventional such as “love”, “comfort”, and “warmth”. Further more, connotations may be of a metonymic or metaphorical nature such as in “Necessity could also be, for example, It is impossible idea of a cognitive Every perception has its own set of w-elements, predicative correspondence is fixed, in very much perception and connotations Mathematical to which it relates. The in 1291. and its own its own set of connotations, the sets. They are given once the instance perception is given as a two-place partial predicate. category theory started with [ 171. It provides the same way that the details of the cup are accessible once a relates to a specific instance of a cup. The correspondence to separate perception from the environment between w-elements supraindividual its environment that includes is elaborated between results which can be used across a wide spectrum of mathematical ]l ,13,28,43]. No specific knowledge of category theory is assumed for reading The required categorical concepts will be introduced whenever emerges from the context, providing an ad hoc justification that the categorical are too complex to be grasped by a verbal description. toolkit often allows a precise description of complex phenomena their actual applicability It so happens that for the formalism. tools of scrutiny for stating domains and objects this paper. the setting, This work defines perceptions as a domain of mathematical discourse, where different among represent different members of the category. Structural can be studied, yet leaving ample room for differences and variety. Indeed, it is that the results will be profound. on more this part which is deep and proper it from that part which is trivial. More specific results to a subset of “better” perceptions. Loosely, these is closed under Boolean perceptions perceptions the more general A combination restricted subcategories of perceptions, to “better” perceptions and separating can be shown if discussion perceptions can be qualified as those where the set of connotations operations. and depth is attained by gradually concentrating the less likely thus identifying of generality is restricted similarities 192 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intdligence 102 (1998) 187-247 2.3. Boolean algebra as a cognitive tool Boolean algebra was first introduced by George Boole [ 121 this first the theory of Boolean algebras was developed both as a special kind of of the set-theoretical notion of a field of sets. Major are due to Jevons, Peirce, Schroeder, Whitehead, Huntington, Tarski, and An Znvestigation of the Laws of Thought. During publication, algebraic ring and as a generalization contributions Stone (to name just a few). in his 1854 statement that followed the century There are debates as to the suitability of Boolean operations to model human cognition, thinking transition level. The idea that Boolean algebra could be [8, pp. 433- is due to George Boole himself cognitive to Boolean artificial is conceived by this study to formalize a bridge between a lower, artificial for example, on a neural network), the from basic artificial perceptions to imitating human perceptual especially at the lower, sensory-motor-neural applied to express acts of conscious 4471. This work is, however, not committed behavior. The categorical perceptions sensory-motor-neural and higher artificial mathematical model between an innate sub-symbolic very basic or more integrated connotations label sensory-motor-neural finally role. level (that could be based, reasoning is flexible enough location of a boundary cognitive processes. Either can be introduced at the level where perceptions outputs with symbols, and semantics begin lower level, and higher-level levels. As mentioned in the Introduction to accommodate section, to play a any The cognitive processes that are described in this work result that are cast as Boolean algebras. They are structures in embodied cognitive that are, among other as logical formulas. The dominant view in AI is that the knowledge reasoning programs ought to be represented by data structures with interpretable structures things, content of high-level this property [24]. 2.4. Partiality of perception, three values of truth, nonmonotonicity One of the assumptions that will be expressed by the formalization is not total. Recall the perception of the closed box from the beginning of Section 2. Assume “full”, now that it does discern it as a single w-element: and that the predicative correspondence in the world is adapted to the reader’s choice. “box”, that it has the connotation of “full” to w-elements is that perception - The agent may be unable to perceive whether the w-element “box” is “full” due to sensory-motor-neural deficiencies. - In other cases the agent might have the required sensory-motor-neural is irrelevant to use them because the question but it does not bother purposes. capabilities, to its current - In yet another case the agent might have knowledge of the contents of the box, but for current purposes it is more practical not to distinguish full boxes from others. - There can also be a case where the box is only half full, and it is better to leave the question unanswered until, eventually, practical or other considerations will determine the box status as full or not. Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 193 to leave perception undefined. For is partial: in some cases it gives no definite answer. Whether In all these cases, and there may be others, it is desirable such reasons the p-predicate the “box” is “full” may be true (t),fuZse solution (f), or undejined (u). is to have a third truth value, undefined The proposed, non-classical, (u for short), and to define the predicate as total. The predicate then assumes the third truth value, u, whenever perception is undefined. This does not mean that we admit more than two genuine truth values. It rather captures the idea of a truth value gap, and provides us with a convenient designation for the undefined cases. there are a few three-valued In the mathematical background is that the third truth value represents logics [26,27,57], each of interpretation. Two of them are relevant to us. Kleene’s [36] intuitive them with its intuitive there exists a truth value, interpretation only it is not exposed for some reason. This corresponds to the cases above where there is ignorance or irrelevance of the fullness of the box. It could also capture indifference or is that the third truth value inattentiveness. to the case of the half represents full box where there is no decision yet, with the assumption that it might eventually be decided. or future contingence. This corresponds [41,42] intuitive Lukasiewicz’s indeterminacy interpretation ignorance: Intuitively, and biconditional: relates to the conditional formula from its components, that where one can determine then, these are two different interpretations. Technically, that truth value, regardless of whether or not certain of its components though, the resulting logics are very similar. Both follow the principle the truth t or f, of a compound well-formed value, that wfs should are be assigned undecided. So, for example, A v B will be assigned the value t if one of A or B is assigned the value t, even if the value u is assigned to the other. The only formal difference between and Kleene’s connectives Lukasiewicz’s under t when A and B are interpretation Lukasiewicz’s indeterminate. Consequently, the law of identity: it is always t that A t, A. From the interpretational the conditional A -+ B is assigned his system, unlike Kleene’s, preserves the law of identity. Hence Lukasiewicz’s is of a rather pragmatic nature: point of view, we want our third truth value to capture both the case. For other reasons we wanted to ignorance/irrelevance logic is adopted here. Our preserve truth value might eventually interpretation this become defined, fact, so that the question whether or not it has already been is not a matter of a universal to our purposes. decided in some transcendental way becomes meaningless Any instance of perception may give no answer on whether the “box” is “full”. This is done for reasons “private” to the agent, with no need to give any account whatsoever about them. This is very much in the same way that there is no need to explain why a box is either “full” or not. The issue of why perception three-valued t or f, but right now it is not. By the individuality is us it is simply warrants no discussion. logic has an aspect of nonmonotonicity. case and the future contingence Let us reconsider of perceptions Lukasiewicz’s and irrelevant the undefined three-valued perception of the box. Suppose that it confirms about a set of boxes the following facts: - Any box that is perceived full is also perceived red. - Any box that is perceived not red is also perceived not fill. (By “not full” and “not red” boxes truth value false Suppose, in addition, in answer to the relevant question, and not that the answer is undefined.) that there is one box (or more) for which both redness and fullness it is meant that the p-predicate actually yields the 194 Z. Ar?i-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 from concluding logic will differ from Kleene’s. are not defined by perception Lukasiewicz’s perception which we have just adopted, perception will nonetheless box is always red. Indeed, some time in the future the blanket might be removed, so that perception will improve that this box is full but to the point where it definitely observes green. The conclusion will have to be retracted. (the box is covered by a blanket), This is exactly a case where logic, such a box will prevent logic afill that a full box is always red. However, by Lukasiewicz’s come to that conclusion: In Kleene’s Reasoning to learning in response information. The incompleteness some new fact. Nonmonotonicity to name just a few). The intelligent in AI, and many efforts and achievements were recorded agent “jumps of the information is called nonmonotonic when the reasoning agent must withdraw a previously is often deduced conclusion in this area of encountered to conclusions” research ([46,47,52,53] is represented, in spite of incomplete in our case, by the third truth value, u. The agent might eventually use these perceptual for practical purposes (such as the advice to dump all boxes that are not red). conclusions This constitutes to imagine a natural situation where humans and take such risks. A typical reason for doing this is that the jump agent needs in order to achieve the risk it might stay with nothing much to do. Insisting on something. Without absolute security with no risks may often be paralyzing: i.e., it might be impractical either to keep all boxes or to check all of them. to come to as many plausible a risk. It is not impossible to such conclusions as possible conclusions taking 2.5. Summary of Section 2 The formalization of artificial perceptions in a mathematical system will be based on the following pre-theoretical intuitions: - Perceptions differs from one artificial agent to another, There does not exist any perception which is “objectively” correct. All perceptions are legitimate. of perceptions and a set of internal between is the correspondence reflections (connotations). between a set of These sets and for every instance of them are determined independently - The necessary component outside w-elements the correspondence artificial perception. - In “better” perceptions _ Artificial perception the set of connotations is closed under Boolean connectives. is partial. It may not provide a definite answer to every question about its perception. The reasons for this may vary, but all the cases where perception is undefined are treated uniformly by Lukasiewicz’s logic. It is assumed the undefined cases of perception might turn out to be defined either that eventually as true or as false. three-valued - Due to the partiality of perceptions agent may “jump to conclusions” risks are taken for the sake of coming order to achieve something. that may eventually and its treatment by the three-valued logic, the turn out to be incorrect. Such in as possible to as many plausible conclusions In commitment formalization, to the mathematical only from the formal premises using mathematical a result is reached, it will be possible to examine results will be inferred and concluded tools and methods. However, whenever it with regard to these pre-theoretical Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$cial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 195 considerations, perceptions and cognition. and to test it against existing theories and opinions about artificial 3. Background and related research This study does not directly carry forward an existing body of work. It tries to propose framework, where no such framework already exists, for a theory research paths. Methods and logic will a new mathematical of artificial perceptions. results from category theory, Boolean algebra and Lukasiewicz’s be applied, as explained above. These are the mathematical beaten tracks that we tread. It is, however, akin three-valued to several In AI this work falls in with other applications of mathematical methods for purposes for [9,16]. The advantages of mathematical formalizations as analyzed, of this domain example, testability, allowance by a verbal description, and allowance in the introduction to [ 151 include clarity, precision, versatility, generalizability, to model complex phenomena that are far too complex to be grasped to use results of a well-developed science. and solving strategies Within mathematics, category theory seems suitable for purposes of AI. AI tries, in a as intelligence engineering further argues tools for problem theory provides a guide a particular model of the general, account of all particulars”. Lawvere to the complex, but very non-arbitrary intelligence by creating particular models of artificial theory has approximated for a general In that context the following experience, only sufficient that for a general account of such intelligence. from Lawvere [39] seems relevant: “even within mathematical sense, to approximate well as foundations quotation that [category] as a foundation category constructions of the concepts and their interactions which grow out of the study of any serious object of study. There has not been, however, much AI related research utilizing mathematical categorical category theory. A few examples are given in [lo]. They include employing terminology reformulation [4], for program [40], and for representation [59]. Except for the very use of the categorical are different from the category of perceptions presented these applications infrastructure, is demonstrated here. A recent revival of interest in category by the publication is typically on categorical Another logic and semantics. long research path that this work touches is the study of cognition. Cognitive in human adequate from a psychological point of view. However, intelligence studies have other motivations cognition and in being empirically their track often coincides with that of AI. Concepts and processes of human have inherently been a source of inspiration no exception. a psychological some common aspects with the descriptive the “conceptual architecture formalization enabled here by the usage of the categorical theory with cognitive studies is also proposed [2 l-231. It is applied by the cognitive into the spaces do not go, however, that is and processes constructions category in in AI and the present one is from that shares in this study is theory for computer science of several books such as ]3,6,51,58]. Their emphasis spaces” framework by Gardenfors in [14]. Conceptual to being empirically for perception and cognition in [44]. As for the use of Boolean algebra of the variety of complex cognitive toolkit. Marrying mathematical point of view.) One formalism features of the formalization this work is not committed and goals, because they are typically that is described for research (However, interested adequate 196 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmunn /Artificiul Intdligmcr 102 (1998) 187-247 the cognitive sciences, an example is [33] which formalizes semantics using Boolean algebra. for natural language The issue of alternative viewpoints is shared with research and sharing of independently represent different perceptions. design. Different ontologies interoperability Dealing with alternative viewpoints systems that try to model perception of each user (or users’ class). Some of our examples be related to that. created ontologies is also shared with research users also need individual their [20] agrees in the area of ontology that achieving task. is a challenging in user modeling [32]: to deal with the particular (e.g., Example 9) will As we proceed with the definitions, constructions, and results of this study, associations of specific presentation. aspects with other research will be mentioned in the context of their 4. The formal concept of artificial perception We postulate between phenomena outside which are internal own set of w-elements, between the sets. the abstract idea of a perception as a mathematical construct which relates the artificial agent, a set of world elements, and reflections to the artificial agent, a set of connotations. Every perception has its its own set of connotations, and its own predicative correspondence Definition 1. A perception machine (perception for short) is a three-tuple (r, Z, e) where: - & and Z are finite, disjoint sets. - e is a three-valued predicate Q : I x Z + {t, f, u}. the outside, objective, world which the machine perceives. Anything The set 8 represents which exists independent of the artificial agent, and could perhaps be discerned by it, could be a legitimate element of E and hence an w-element. Example w-elements may be a sound, a light, a blow of wind, a vapor (smelly or not), a candy bar, etc. These example w-elements are typically discerned by the human sensory-motor-neural apparatus, but some artificial perceptions may be unable them. They may, however, for humans, such as certain kinds of radiation. discern w-elements Furthermore, different perceptions might break the same reality into different wholesome w-elements. An example was given in the introduction: wherever one perceives a single of six w-elements wholesome w-element “board’. For humans, a human face would usually be a single, wholesome w-element is easily perceived. Whether this is also the case where machine perception is, however, not so clear. Hence, although we assume the external environment objective existence, phenomenon, that is involved, to have an (This as related to humans, has been studied by gestalt psychology into w-elements depends on the specific perception. “box”, another may perceive an arrangement that are imperceptible its division to discern [ 181.) The set Z stands for the internal representation, Its elements have a subjective existence dependent on the machine. Anything which may be stored and manipulated icons, etc.) could be a legitimate element of Z and hence a connotation. Example connotations may stand for the pitch and/or duration the ontology, of w-elements. (words, symbols, in the machine Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 191 and/or timbre and/or volume of a sound, the brightness and/or hue and/or saturation of a light, etc. These example connotations that are measurable by humans, and hence considered “objective”. However, “hot” and/or “dark” as well (the last one is not a typo). and/or “good” and/or “?!?!?” are legitimate connotations These are definitely not “objective”, they depend on the specific perception. represent attributes or properties typically The three-valued predicate Q is the perception predicate the connection between (p-predicate the environment for short) which and internal relates w-elements and connotations, representations. The terminology for the various Q values will be the following: - Q(W. o) = t, it will be said that w has connotation CY. _ Q(W, a) = f, it will be said that w lacks connotation CY. - e(w, a) = u, it will be said that w may either have or lack this connotation, the “or” is evidently exclusive. This undefined value might eventually become defined but right now it is not. that subsymbolic, to the agent and its architecture. The emergence of higher-level perception apparatus depends on this apparatus its gestalt perception, mental strings do not necessarily invisible vapor may, for instance, have the connotation The perception, and the values of Q in particular, is part of the definition of an agent, given data. This is supposed to capture the intuition early perceptual processing is innate from the sensory-motor-neural itself, the agent’s function and internal organization, that are alphabetic (if they have any). A smelly “pink”. This may and experience. Likewise, depend on the agent’s own individual architecture, programming the issue of why the p-predicate has any one of the three values at a certain point simply warrants no discussion. As an example, the undefined u value of the p-predicate may be due to ignorance, future contingence or other reasons. From the philosophical point of view, these possible reasons are quite different one from the other. In our context, however, the actual reason for a specific u value, or whether or not it is already “decided” in some transcendental way, is irrelevant. follow their dictionary definitions imagery, etc. Connotations irrelevance, 4. I. Example perceptions Our example environment will be a bookstore environment, where books are the w-elements. Agents who “enter” the store have different perceptions of this environment, varying with their topics of interest, budget restrictions, goals and reasons for “entering” the store. etc. . . . , paperback, ISBN2, title2 ) . . , authomame 1, authorname2, Example 2. Let P = (E, Z, Q) be a “catalog” perception where: Z = (science, jiction, art, travel, children, cookbooks > . . . . titlel, , . , publisher-l, publiser2, topten, hardcover, . . . , ISBNI, . . , editionl, reduced, pages2, . . .). For all books w in & and for all connotations CY E Z, Q(W, a) = t if and edition2, only if w has that connotation by P. It is f if and only if w does not have that connotation by P. It is u if P does not offer any perception of that connotation. in other typical cases as well) the connotations can be subdivided as topic connotations, In this example (and (such into “families” colorplates, . . . , pricel, price2, etc.) and the number of different connotations title connotations, leatherbound, . . . , pagesl, 198 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowki, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligrnce 102 (1998) 187-247 can be very large. ’ However, they all share the same status as elements of Z. Gardenfors [21-231 offers to make a distinction “conceptual constructions that make the from our later Boolean among different “quality dimensions” in this spirit will follow naturally space”. A distinction in Section 9.1. not-interesting, Example 3. Let P = (&, Z, Q) be a “customer” perception where: I = (topic-of-interest, got-it-already, favorite-author, thick, heard-of-it, . . . }. For all books w in E, e(w, favorite- hmm, makes-a-nice-present, author) = t if and only if w is written by a favorite author of that perception, etc. The values of Q are decided individually In a typical case many p-predicate values are u, since most books are closed and lying on the shelves. for every customer perception. buy-it, good-price, in-bad-shape, We terminate with two perceptions of a more abstract nature. Definition 4. Let & be an environment. The universal perception of & is Z& = (E, 2E, E) where: _ the set of connotations, - for all w E I and for all A c E, E(W, A) = t 2&, is the field of all subsets of E; if and only if w E A, otherwise E(W, A) = f. The universal perception of E thus has a totally two-valued p-predicate. For any subset that describes it has a unique connotation of books in the bookstore example, for instance, it accurately. Definition 5. Let & be an environment. is empty. The p-predicate is, of course, degenerate. P, = (E, 0, QN). In the empty perception of E the set of connotations An empty perception cannot relate to its environment 1. 4.2. Perception morphisms Given the variety and individuality It changes all the time and one needs channels the differences between different perceptions. Perception of perceptions as above, one needs a way to bridge, to be if possible, for a dynamic, or “fluid” phenomenon. the flow of change. Perception morphisms for short) are going to serve as a formal tool for this purpose. Suppose that PI = (El, 21, Q,) and P2 = (E2,Z2, e2) are is the same for two perceptions. We are going to consider cases where the environment both perceptions: El = E2, and hence designated simply E. Since & is fixed, we shall omit the first component from the definition of perceptions: P = (I, .Q) is a short designation for P = (f, Z, Q). (The cases of paths between perceptions with different environments are going to be treated in a separate study.) is also known (p-morphisms A p-morphism from PI this “translation” to P2 will be defined as a set mapping of the connotations. between connotations should “make sense”: the essence of However, ’ At any point there is, however, only a finite number of active connotations. 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Arr$cial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 199 as meaningful connotations One thus needs to define some “structure preservation” formal definition representations follows: of the outside world should be maintained. condition on the mapping. The Definition 6. Let I be an environment. Consider P2 = (X2, ~2). h : PI + P2 is a perception morphism following conditions hold: two perceptions, PI = (Zt , Q I) and for short) if the two (p-morphism (i) h is a set mapping of the connotations h : 11 -+ 12. (ii) h is no-blur: for all w E I, and for all the domain connotations a! E 11, whenever QI (w, 0) #u then ez(w, h(a)) = @I (w, a). The definite (t/f) values of the p-predicate are preserved by p-morphisms. 4.3. Examples of perception morphisms The following examples illustrate the flexibility of p-morphisms, to bridge between different perceptions and their ability possible). We return to the “bookstore” example environment perception of Example 2 and the various “customer” perceptions of Example 3. (whenever (often called “arrows”) is of books, to the “catalog” such a bridge Example 7. Consider where Zi = [interesting, not-interesting}, with “opposite” two “bookstore” perceptions: Pt = (11, Q,) and P2 = (22, Q?) tastes-for all books w in E: ~1 (w, interesting) = Q~(w, not-interesting), ~1 (w, not-interesting) = ~2(w, interesting) h is defined by: (interesting Anot-interesting), (not-interesting t-f!+ interesting). - It is easy to see that h is no-blur and hence a p-morphism no-blur a matter of fact, it is a rigid case of a p-morphism: QZ(W, h(a)) = QI(W, a) to hold only in the definite cases where et (w, cr) # u. by Definition 6. As the equality requires - h is one-to-one p-morphism and onto. Moreover, hK’ is also no-blur, so that h has an inverse and hence the perceptions Pt and Pz are isomorphic. Example 8. Consider and a p-morphism h : PI + P2. - h may generalize perception two “catalog” perceptions of &, PI = (Zt . Q,) and P2 = (22. Q?), in that several domain topics map to a single codomain topic in a many-to-one manner, e.g., (math, physics &science). - In some cases h could feature a simple translation, for instance if the domain prices are in US dollars, while the codomain’s prices are in ECU: (price-i( USdollars) tfk price-i(ECU)). - The domain perception may not specify certain connotations, such as either topten or in the codomain do not have sources under h, leatherbound, and hence h features an “expansion”. so that these connotations 200 Z. At%-Gonczarowski. D. Lehmann /Arfijicial Infelligenw 102 (199X) 1X7-247 - In some cases the mapping may be simple, e.g., (topten &:topten), however, topten for the domain perception et (w, topten) = u but Q~(w, topten) = t may be undefined is defined, so that there is some “unblurring”. Example 9. Let PI = (11, Q 1) be a “catalog” perception as in Example 2, and let P2 = (12, ~2) be a “customer” perception as in Example 3. Let h : 732 -+ PI be a p-morphism based on the mapping: (art, travel A topic-of-interest), (all other topics. . &not-interesting), (prices less than 25 . . A good-price), (titleN &heard-of-it), (pages more than 400. . . ?+ thick), (titleM &got-it-already), (topten, reduced A hmm) , (leatherbound, colorplates &makes-a-nice-present), for all other connotations: (a ?+ blabla-a). - The essence of no-blur: books that are art and books that are travel for the catalog for P2. Books that do not cost less than 25 are not for P2, etc. However, it may be that, for some book w, et (w, titZe7) = u, perception are topic-of-interest good-price but Q~(w, got-it-already) = t. - Many connotations of Pt , such as ISBN, publisher, etc., map to the respective blabla for h has to be defined on all the for P2. The intuition of the blabla connotations P2, although source connotations.) they are perceived by it. (Technically, is that they have no significance _ h is not onto: some P2 connotations (such as buy-it) do not have an h source they are not captured by PI and h. A few possible in Pt. Loosely, connotation explanations: l The connotation buy-it is a function of a combination of catalog connotations, and we do not have a way to express it, yet. l The customer’s favorite authors are simply not in the authorlist of the catalog perception. l The catalog perception customer’s perception is unable to perceive that a book is in-bad-shape, while the is able to perceive this. serves the store owner, and he also has knowledge If the catalog perception of the p-morphism h, then h may be considered as a “customer model” that may be used to better customers are abstracted as individual serve the customer. perceptions, the core of a “model” of the customer. Customer modeling can be viewed as a special case of user modeling, also mentioned the end of Section 3. In a context where individual an arrow such as h would constitute at 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmnnn /Artificial Intelligence 102 (19%) 187-247 201 Example 10. Let Pt = (1, Q 1) be a bookstore perception, and let P2 = (1, ~2) be a perception with the same set of connotations. Let h : P, + P2 be a p-morphism based on the identity mapping. By the no-blur property of the p-morphism is, in the general case, an improvement of P 1: there may be books with imperceptible are definitely perceived by the target, for the domain perception, yet these connotations improved, perception. (e.g., the books are now open so that more things can be perceived about them). The term improvement will designate either the improving p-morphism h, the target perception P2, or the target imply one p-predicate 42. Since h is the identity on connotations another. Note that h is one-to-one if there is some “unblurring” an isomorphism: then h does not have an inverse p-morphism. and onto, yet it is not necessarily improvement of perception. these concepts uniquely In this case h formalizes of perception, connotations h, P2 Example 11. Let P be yet another perception that stand for the size of the book (X x y x z centimeters), paper. It is probably perceptions above. to construct a p-morphism impossible that perceives books using connotations its font and the quality of the from or into any of the example We terminate with two special arrows: Example 12. Let U& = (C, 2’, E) be the universal perception of E, as in Definition 4, then for every perception P = (1, Q), there exists a morphism h : P -+ ZA& as follows: - Define ?’ = (1, $) to be a totally two-valued perception where z(w, a) = Q(W? (Y) if and only of a definite a p-morphism is a special case of an improvement morphism improvement. if Q(W, cr) # u. This can be achieved from P by an arbitrary choice truth value whenever Q(W, o) = u. The identity mapping on Z defines h : P + P: it is no-blur by definition of c. As a matter of fact, it (as in Example 10): it is a total - There exists a natural p-morphism v : @ -+ U&, which is defined by: n(cr) = (w E - E IlG(w, a) = t). It is easy to see that q defines a rigid, and hence no-blur p-morphism. It is also easy to see that the composite mapping h = zo q defines a p-morphism ” to U&. (As a matter of fact, a composition of p-morphisms introduces is always a p-morphism.) two possibilities - h, and hence also h, is not unique. Its definition for every from u value of P: t or f. Example 13. Let P, = (I, 0, QH) be the empty perception of E (as in Definition 5). For every perception P of E, there exists a (unique) morphism h : P, + P. It is based for on the empty mapping of connotations, p-morphisms. and it emptily stands the no-blur condition 4.4. Categorical,formalization of perception machines Having defined perceptions categoq of perceptions as a basis for a mathematical the infrastructure the same manner and the category of groups.) homomorphisms, and perception morphisms, we would the (In for group theory is provided by defining groups, group like to define theory of artificial perceptions. 202 Z. Arzi-Gonczumwuki. D. Lehmann /Art@-id Intelligenw 102 (1998) 1X7-247 All perception machines (E, Z, Q) with the same first component E will be regarded as a collection, soon to be formalized as a mathematical category. Definition 14. Prc&, perceptions of I, is the collection of all objects of the form (I, 1, Q), called perceptions, where ~5, 1, Q are as in Definition in the designation Prc,c, we use (1. Q) instead of (&, 1, Q). 1. Since E already appears There are various possible sets E of w-elements, collections. Definition 14 does not discard I, the environment. higher in the hierarchy. Inside PrCE as the bookstore environment), perceptions. so that it becomes all perceptions redundant so we are actually defining a family of It rather raises it one level (such in the specification of single refer to the same environment Defining Pi-CE as a mathematical science: category theory. The definition of a category requires category provides infrastructure that: from a well-developed _ One is given a set of objects. _ Given any pair of objects P, Q, one has a collection of motphisms f’ : P + & from P to Q. Given a morphism such as ,f, P is the domain of f, and Q is the codomain off‘. _ Morphisms should be closed under composition: and g : Q -+ R, where may form their composite, f : P -+ Q the codomain of ,f is the same as the domain of g, one f o g : P -+ 72, such that f o g, which is a morphism: given two morphisms f 0 g(a) = g(.f (a)) (i.e., apply f, then K). should be associative: - Composition _ For every object P there should be an identity morphism _ The identity morphism should be the (left and right) unit element of composition: ,f o g o h = (f o g) o h = .f’ o (g o h). Idp : P -+ P. for everyf:P+Q, Idpof=f=foldQ. In our context the objects are perceptions P, Q. . . and morphisms are p-morphisms. The remaining is defined is defined by the identity by set composition of the mappings, and the identity p-morphism mapping. can be easily settled, since composition of p-morphisms requirements Lemma 15. PTCE, and the identity morphism are defined at the level ef set mappings) together with Definition 6 of morphisms (composition of morphisms is a category. The construction in terms of these very few primitives perception, perceptions: a p-morphism, applicational and composition tidiness. and formalization of all perceptual cognitive processes will be trimmed that category theory provides for the study of artificial of as well as and codomain perception theoretical domain perception of p-morphisms. This predicts p-morphism, A discussion of the basic mathematical well as more example applications, applications of basic categorical notions can be provided: properties of the category of perceptions, as is provided by [2]. Already at this point example Example 16. Consider Examples h : PI + P2 8 and 9. If there translating between two “catalog” perceptions, and there is a p-morphism g : P2 + P3 that is a p-morphism 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 203 models a “customer” perception P3 in terms of the catalog perception P2, then a composite p-morphism h o g would neatly model the customer’s perception P3 in terms of the catalog perception Pt. This opens the way, for instance, to a formalization of cooperation between two systems where each one models its own customers. A perception should be able, among other things, to preserve its autonomy within a so- ciety of other perceptions. The variety can occur between several distinct agents, or within forms of joint one single agent. Some standard categorical in [2]. perceptions, with varying degrees of trust and partnership. They are elaborated tools are capable of formalizing trust using coproducts-a Example 17. Maximal is their “least expanded common expansion”: the as well. Injecting morphisms are the formal tool that perceptions of the other participants puts them together. This kind of joint perceptions could be useful in any one of the many cases where there is more than one possible perception of a given environment. It provides a neat formal way to go about joining coproduct of a family of perceptions an expansion of perception to include them. Partnership in coproduct perceptions may be enhanced by merging connotations that are (common sense connotations). This can be formally done shared by different perceptions by a proper pushout. Minimal trust using products-a is their “least blurred common blur”. Example cases where such product perceptions may be useful are cases where points of disagreement have to be blurred. Projecting morphisms are the formal tool that filters out separate aspects of the joint perceptions. product of a family of perceptions Pullbacks are capable of formally to the desired that feature definite or possible future agreement. This formalizes the product perceptions restricting subset of connotations minimal trust partnerships that concentrate on similarities between the participants. 4.5. Summary of Section 4 The domain of discourse of perception machines was formally defined and categorized. environment within which one can scrutinize In the sequel this formalization will be justified by showing that tools to the study of artificial perceptions This provides a well-known mathematical artificial perceptions. provided by category theory are useful and meaningful and related cognitive processes. The scrutiny will pay by leading us to more insights and to practical constructions and results: it is a means rather than an end by itself. 5. A natural structure of perceptions it can already be observed By merely looking at the examples is more is represented, once it is tied with the environment E via the perception Q, there lawlike orders and patterns which can be observed about it: one connotation than just an arbitraty entity which stands all by itself. No matter how a connotation internally are certain may suggest another, some connotations there are other possible connections come always together while others never do, and suggest that as well. All these interlacing connections that a connotation 204 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmnnn /Artificial Intelligence IO2 (1998) 1X7-247 Z has an inner structure, objects of the category Prc&: perception of the environment element into the internal representation. induced by & and Q. This is suggestive of more structure in the seems to introduce a structural 5. I. Synonyms Two connotations may be indistinguishable in that they stand for the same perception values. If they could be merged, it could mean a useful extraction of the perceptual essence and redundancies. This formalizes a out of the set of connotations, with no duplications cognitive process of generalization: forming a general term from particulars. Definition 18. Let P = (1, .Q) be a perception, and let (Y, B E 1. a! and /I are synonyms (or e-synonyms), denoted a-p, if for all w in & Q(W, w) = Q(W, /l). 2 It is obvious that: Proposition 19. 2: is an equivalence relation. The quotient set Z/Z, whose elements are the distinct synonymity equivalence classes, will be designated Z*. The predicate Q is of course well-defined on E x Z* as well, and the resulting perception will be designated P* = (Z*, Q). in the set of connotations, of synonymity between connotations. the A change internalization It is neatly and easily formalized by one of our categorical primitives: a p-morphism. Let P = (Z, Q) and P” = (Z*, Q) Define the class the mapping of all synonyms of CX. Obviously: from Z to Z*, captures a cognitive process: : a H [a], where [a] designates into the quotient set: Mp : I+ I* Proposition 20. Mp ple 7.) : P + P* is a rigid p-morphism. (Rigid was explained in Exam- For readers interested in the mathematical-categorical context, a p-morphism is a coequalizer if and only if it merges synonyms only [2]. Example 21. In Example 3 the following could be synonyms: (big-red-sticker-good-price). 5.2. Subsumptions The idea behind synonyms the same w-elements, exactly is now relaxed. one appears Instead of two connotations representing a subset of the w-elements to represent * In its original understanding labels, and not between connotations. Our reading of this tern, as well as other terns such as “connotation ” is, indeed, inspired by their original readings. However, to their exact traditional understanding. there is no obligation that holds between is a relation synonymity linguistic 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 205 by the other. The family of w-elements with connotation p has, as “sub- represented family” the w-elements with connotation CX. Taken the other way round, w-elements with connotation o seem to always have connotation #l as well. This means that connotation o seems to subsume or imply connotation ,!I. Definition 22. Let P = (1, Q) be a perception, and let CX’, p E 1. a! subsumes a~]~,ifforallwinE,e(w.~)=t~e(w,~)=tande(w,~)=f~~(w,w)=f. p, denoted The condition of Definition 22 is designated VW E I Q(W, cr) % Q(W, B). In the absence of u values, % becomes the classical two-valued material implication. Proposition 23. The a relation is a quasi-order in 1. The passage from the set of connotations Z to the set of equivalence classes of synonyms Z* was shown to be a rigid p-morphism of (1. Q) onto (Z”, Q). Namely, it rigidly preserves between elements of 1” can be defined in exactly the p-predicate Q. Hence subsumptions the same way as subsumptions between connotations of 1. Moreover: Proposition 24. The subsumption relation a is a partial ordering on Z* Example 25. In the universal perception of & (see Definition 4), let A, B E 2& be subsets ofE.ThenAaBifandonlyifA& B. Example 26. In Example 2 the following the specific perception): subsumptions may be observed (depending on (Asirnov g science-jiction) (art 9 colorplates). The definition of % and to the conditional biconditional logic was discussed logic, any connotation u t, u, connotations not have been their own synonyms. both subsumes that are undefined , 2, 9 are inspired by the definition (respectively) in Section 2. By preserving that Lukasiewicz gave to the logic. The choice of this in his 3-valued the law of identity as in Lukasiewicz’s to itself. Without having (i.e., Q(W, (Y) = u) could itself and is synonym for some w-elements Synonyms and subsumptions indeed not a universal The practical possibility of the subjectivity environments need not be universal. it is truth that reduced price books are marked with big red stickers. to treat worlds with special features and patterns is another aspect in their and flexibility of perceptions. Artificial perceptions In Example 21, for instance, “browse” and detect synonyms and subsumptions. 5.3. Nonmonotonicity of the relations If synonyms of perceptions, p-morphisms. However, and subsumptions then are to be regarded as structure this structure might naturally be expected in the category to be preserved by it can be easily seen that this is generally not the case: let a~$ 206 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lrhmann /Artificial lntelli~enw 102 (I 998) 187-247 in a given perception P = (Z, Q). Let w E E be such that Q(W, a) = q(w, fi) = u. Let it may h : P + Q be a p-morphism, where Q = (3, r). By Definition 6 of p-morphisms be that t(w, h(a)) # t(w, h(p)). it may be that t(w, h(a)) = t but t(w, h(p)) # t. In that case h(a)@(/3). In that case h(a)$h(/3). Similarly, if asp, Hence, when a p-morphism is applied, either one of the relations 2 and 5 may not of the nonmonotonicity be fully preserved. This phenomenon will be henceforth called these relations. (Section 2.4). It was also discussed in the context of our pre-theoretical considerations The example cases used above are such that Q(W, CY) = Q(W, p) = u. It can be easily verified from the definitions of 2: and 9 that these are the only ones that represent possible nonmonotonicity (see Example is central to this study. The “open-minded” that for some w E I under a p-morphism. of improvements it so happens improvements The issue of monotonicity (see Example 12) of perceptions of all possible On monotone stability. Whenever a perception is (totally) be asked is whether the (total) improvement total improvements the other hand, restricting IO) and total improvements consideration generally means nonmonotonicity. to monotone but there are advantages improved, one of the first questions is monotone or not. and in their that will improvements and total improvements the discussion only is less “open-minded”, Example 27. The f-total every u value of perception if Q(W, a) # u, otherwise ef (w, (zr) = f. This improvement acceptable “default” strategy. improvement, designated ef, of a perception P = (I, Q), takes to an f value: for all pairs (w, a) in E x 1, ef (w, (;Y) = e(w, a) It represents an is monotone. Example 28. The t-totul every u value of perception if Q(W, a) # u, otherwise et(w, a) = t. This improvement designated et, of a perception P = (Z, Q), takes to a t value: for all pairs (w, CX) in E x Z, et(w, a) = e(w, w) is monotone as well. improvement, The idea of monotone total improvements has a conservative flavor. However, there is and anything which is undefined could for example, by the f- and t-total quite a variety within monotone still turn to be either true or false. (As demonstrated, improvements.) total improvements, To be able to restrict ourselves and total improvements), monotone improvements category of perceptions. (A subcategory from the category, such that composition those of the category.) to monotone p-morphisms only (including, a subcategory is defined within of course, the consists of (subsets of) objects and morphisms coincide with in the subcategory and identities Definition 29. Prep, the monotone subcategory ofperceptions, consists of: - all the perceptions of Prc&, - monotone p-morphisms, h : P + Q, such that CY 9 ,I?J =+ h(cx) a h(b). Proposition 30. PrcFon is a subcategory qf’Prc& Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 207 Example 31. Following Example 21 of synonyms, there may be an improving p-morphism (see Example 10) into an improved “customer” perception of the bookstore where some books with big-red-stickers are not good-price. is not in 7%cy. In that case the improvement p-morphism 5.4. Summary qf Section 5 In the quest for structure in the set of connotations one may detect lawlike orders define a quasi-order and patterns. Two relations were defined and exemplified: Subsumptions synonyms subsumptions subcategory of perceptions was defined, which constitutes that preserve the two relations. p-morphisms on any perception, are merged, one even gets as much as a partial order. Synonyms are not necessarily preserved by p-morphisms. For that reason the monotone synonyms and subsumptions. and in *perceptions, where all and all perceptions, but only the 6. Boolean perceptions perceptions The previous section gave us a lead to the structure of perceptions: are naturally endowed with a quasi-order, and *perceptions (where synonyms are merged) are similarly endowed with a partial order. The structure of a lattice thus comes to mind. Links in a perception. Since the purpose in the lattice may capture relationships which are implicit of this study is to have agents possess very structured and expressive perceptions, let us idea even further. Let us see what happens if a perception has continue with this suggestive lattice, a set of connotations which has the structure of a complemented namely a Boolean algebra. This is, in a sense, form of a partially in terms of the two operations ordered set. Indeed, artificial v and A. On the intuitive of other agent should have a perception of connotations connotations. such as (topic-of-interestr\good-price), however, set is still far from being a Boolean algebra, and perceptions, as defined so far, do not generally have such a complex structure. The gap should somehow be closed. We first define and study perceptions with a Boolean set of connotations. Later, we shall examine various ways of marrying the concreteness of basic perceptions with the powers of abstraction of the Boolean structure. to expect that an intelligent that are Boolean combinations In Example 3 it would be natural for perceptions or (not-interestingvgot-it-already), lattices can alternatively level, it is not unnatural to have connotations the most structured that a quasi-ordered It is remembered, and distributive or (-thick). be defined 6. I Permits If the set of connotations is closed under Boolean connectives, (as allowed until now) might violate a certain sense of adequacy p-predicate external world. Whereas our original definition perceived of the other connotations, dependence between the Boolean sense. As an example, independently the p-predicate values of different connotations if a w-element has both connotations had every connotation of perceptions the new construct calls for some kind of in a! and ,?l, then an that are dependent then an arbitrary to the 208 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 agent claiming Technically, Consider that this w-element lacks o A p could hardly be described as “intelligent”. this would disgrace the qualification of Q as a predicate. the universal perception of Definition 4. Its set of connotations 25 is, of if a w-element operations of conjunction, It is easy to see that the universal p-predicate course, a Boolean algebra with the set-theoretical is “well-behaved”. As and complementation. an example, is an element of both subsets A and B. w is thus an element of both their union A U B and their intersection A n B, and hence it has the connotation A V B as well as A A B, as expected. in should be defined on a Boolean algebra. In the present is three-valued. We have to find a sensible way to embed a in & has both connotations A, B c & then this w-element In the case of a total, two valued, p-predicate there is a known classical manner disjunction which a two-valued predicate case, however, the p-predicate three-valued predicate manner, without surgery into specific w-elements, in a Boolean algebra. This will be first done in a global, categorical connotations or predicates. The definition of Boolean perceptions will “test” these perceptions against the universal that was just shown perception p-morphism perceptiot P intoihe universal perception always exist: to “behave well”. Such a “test” perception. By Example the universal into is neatly cast as a from any 12, p-morphisms _ Let h : P + P be a total improvement o,f P. - Define the natural p-morphism q from P into Z& : from P to UC. - h = 20 q defines a p-morphism is not unique. For C = (B, a) with a Boolean h b-perception, on a mapping it will be necessary that is a Boolean homomorphism. that at least one of these p-morphisms algebra of connotations to be a should be based Definition 32. Let C = (B, o) be a perception of C, if it exists, is a total improvement of C that yields a natural morphism is a Boolean homomorphism such that f? is a Boolean algebra. A permit into Z4& which of the connotations. As with improvements in general (see Example lo), we shall use the word permit to designate either the improving p-morphism These two concepts uniquely imply one another. or, alternatively, the target total p-predicate. Example 33. There are “seemingly well-behaved” permits. Two of them are the f-total and the t-total In the case where ~(w, fi) = a(w, -/?) = u, any permit should have one of the values and the other f, while these improvements that are not (Examples 27 and 28). t assign the same value to both. improvements improvements total An improvement (Example 10) consists of assigning definite values to some of the cases to a partial formation of (as in Example 12), there is an where the p-predicate has had a u value. It is thus very similar a “possible world” [37]. In case of a total improvement assignment of definite values to all those cases, and it is thus similar to a total formation qfa possible world. If .Q represents a partial perception of the environment, then a total improvement G is a total description of one possible perception for (1, Q). Z. A&Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 209 A permit thus indicates a possible perception with regard to the incomplete the b-perception by represented property the universal perception. that it is “sensible”, (B, a). This possible perception in that it can be naturally mapped It thus “arranges” the world I in a sensible way. information has the additional in a Boolean way into 6.2. Definition and categorical status of Boolean perceptions Definition 34. Let a perception C = (a, a) be such that B is a Boolean algebra. C is a Boolean perception b-perception icate for short) if: for short (o is a Boolean perception predicate, b-p-pred- (i) it has a permit as in Definition 32; (ii) closure of the b-p-predicate: all w E & and for ail ,4 E a: let Vc be the (nonempty) set of permits of C, then, for t f u ifGEVc, Z(w,/l)=t, ifVZ?EVc, Z(w,/3)=f, otherwise. It is easy to see that the p-predicate o is uniquely determined by the permits. Example 35. U& itself is a b-perception with the identity as its unique permit. By Definition 32 permits are based on Boolean homomorphisms the universal always map top to top and bottom to bottom, into perception. Since Boolean homomorphisms then: Corollary 36. IfC = (I?, a) is a b-perception, then a(w, T) = t, a(w, I) = f. B-perceptions are perceptions by definition, hence they constitute a subset of the objects in the category Prc,. This subset will be designated Prc:, and its elements are of the form (a, (T) (to make a notational difference first has to establish expected, natural, requirement from (Z, Q)). To define ‘Prc~ as a subcategory one the p-morphisms which could be applied within this subcategory. The is that the additional, i.e., Boolean, structure be preserved. Definition 37, Let Cl = @I, D 1) and C2 = (&, ~2) be b-perceptions. A p-morphism f : Ct -+ Cz is a Boolean perception morphism, b-p-morphism for short, if the mapping f : BI -+ 132 is a Boolean homomorphism. Example 38. In Example 9, if the perceptions morphism between customer such as: them would open the possibility involved were Boolean, then a b-p- for a more complex model of the (authornameNvauthornameA4 Ahmm), (artr\leather-boundr-thick & makes-a-perfect-presentr\buy-it). 210 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (I!?%) 187-247 Example 39. Consider color blindness. Let E be any environment of colorful w-elements, let Pr be a “red-blind” color perception. A p-morphism h : PI + P2 needs to use Boolean combinations: let ‘P2 be a “normal” perception, and (yellowgreen A yellowvgreen), (bluemagenta t% bluevmagenta), (cyanwhite t% cyanvwhite), h (blackred t+ blackvred). Since Boolean homomorphisms are closed under composition, then: Lemma 40. PK: with b-p-morphism.9 is a subcategory qf I&&. 6.3. Equivalent characterizations of Boolean perceptions Definition 34 is an external, categorical one. One might want to fathom its details and consequences, and, in particular, are fulfilled. The main “internal” necessary and sufficient condition technical details and proofs that lead to this lemma are given in Appendix A. 1. to show that the natural expectations result is Lemma 4 1 below. It provides a formulation of a “from inside”. The for the recognition of b-perceptions from a b-p-predicate Lemma 41. A perception C = (a, a) such that the set B of connotations is a Boolean algebra is a b-perception if and only if j??r all w E E: (i) The set (/!J E l?(lo(w, /3) = t} is ajltel: (ii) The set {/I E Bllo(w, #?) = f) is un ideal. (iii) The aboveJilter and ideal are dual one to the other: for all B in B, a(w, #I) = t if and only ifa (w, -b) = f. filters) that include The permits of a b-perception are defined by all the possible maximal the ideal (and dual filter) of Lemma 41. Classical maximal predicates on a Boolean algebra are characterized by such a division and a dual maximal meets the classical b-perceptions total two-valued perceptions. ideals (and dual two-valued ideal filter. This is, in a certain sense, the point where the present study theory that admits only total descriptions and two truth values. Loosely: into are neither total nor two-valued, but they have the potential of evolving into a maximal 6.4. Computing Boolean perception predicates Any agent that uses a b-perception perception of specific w-elements and their connotations. a(w, B) for some w E E and a connotation B E B. While the whole discussion with possible perceptions, a(w, B). A deductive apparatus p-predicate directly under subsumption for practical purposes will eventually deal with the value of the categorical approach gives for an agent to deal the value of some of the values of the and and under from the basic perception. from below, while filters are closed under conjunction Ideals are closed under disjunction ideals, and filters, every it would not be practical to guide the computation its formal support, It might need is needed it needs time Z. Ar~i-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijcial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 211 Table 1 Negation in Boolean perceptions cr(w,a) u(w. -(Y) t f U f t Ll Table 2 Disiunction in Boolean perceptions, a(w, (Y v B) t t t t f u t ” t if (-cr)<b u otherwise (also (-B)<(Y and (Y v ,!I = T) Table 3 Con.junction U(W, a) t f U in Boolean perceptions, a(~, (Y A p) a(w,B) t f U f f U f t f U if&(-B) otherwise (also fiQ(-(r) and o1 A p = I) subsumption predicates, and provides us with truth tables: from above. This gives us the insight we needed into the behavior of b-p- Lemma 42. Let C = (i?, o) be a b-perception. The truth tablesfor given by Tables l-3. (In these tables < designates defined by the Boolean algebraic Law of Consistency.) the b-p-predicate o are the conventional Boolean partial ordel; The proof is given in Appendix A. 1. It is noted that the truth tables are not an arbitrary choice of some three-valued logic, but rather a result of the global categorical structure. 6.5. Summar?; qf Section 6 The category of perceptions the sets of are Boolean algebras and the p-predicates are restricted accordingly. An agent of b-perceptions where has a subcategory has an adequate perception of Boolean combinations of connotations. connotations with b-perception B-perceptions can be characterized in more than one way: 212 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligence 102 (I 998) 187-247 _ Their Definition 34 in terms of possible total perceptions (permits) is of a category theoretical, global, nature. _ B-perceptions can be characterized with the necessary and sufficient Boolean algebraic conditions of Lemma 4 1, using proper ideals and their dual proper filters. Lemma 42 provides a deductive apparatus computation categorical definition yields a p-predicate sense of the term. of specific values of the b-p-predicate. These truth that is “Boolean adequate” that may be algorithmically applied for the tables show that the in a certain common 7. Free generation of Boolean perceptions A general perception has a quasi-ordered is still far from being a Boolean algebra as required subcategory presented above. Closing Boolean version of any perception, with the powers of abstraction of the Boolean structure. set of connotations (Proposition 23), but this for the perceptions of the Boolean this gap means finding a way to somehow form a and thus marry the concreteness of basic perceptions apparatus, and connotations For b-perceptions, the connection between w-elements For simple perceptions from is innate. and accepted as it is. The main It emerges the sensory-motor-neural is the very fact that it has a direct perception property of an agent with this perception on the other hand, there is already some kind of of the environment. structure is subject imposed on perception. Not every predicate will do, and the predicate to an adequacy condition which stems from abstract arguments about the meaning of the in connectives the environment. They are defined In this sense b-perceptions cognitive perceptions. in an abstract way, creations of symbolic processing. flavor, a flavor one expects from “or” , “and’, “not”. These connectives do not have an objective existence have a somewhat abstractive The following step is to try and combine of b-perceptions. An agent could, hopefully, as in Prc,, Pm:. This could be a step towards a certain intuition about artificial cognition. the advantages of simple perceptions with those relate to its environment via direct perception and at the same time process its basic perception in an abstractive way as in The most general Boolean generation over a given perception is introduced and studied, then evaluated. 7.1. Definition of free Boolean perceptions Trying features to integrate Boolean that the set of connotations will have to somehow be closed under Boolean operations. At the same time one wants to preserve perception of the generating connotations. The categorical environment looking for a generating p-morphism: 6 : (Z, Q) -+ (I?, a) such that provides a neat formulation of that: If (I, Q) E Prc& is a perception, one is into a simple perception naturally means - c(Z) is a set of generators for the Boolean algebra B. (This guarantees closure under Boolean operations.) - < is a rigid p-morphism. tions is preserved.) (This guarantees that perception of the generating connota- Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$cial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 213 a; z c-) f FL7 3!h t3 Fig. 1. The free Boolean algebra over 2. C = (D, a) could, hopefully, serve as a b-perception with P = (I, Q) only. for the agent that was, so far, equipped The simplest and most general way to close Z under Boolean operations is to take as free generators. The free Boolean algebra over Z will (see Fig. 1) is that for any Boolean algebra L3 and I? there exists a unique extension h of f which is a Boolean this set of original connotations be designated EJ;. Its main property for any mapping homomorphism f : Z + h : Bt + B. One is thus looking for a Boolean generation of the form where 23; is freely generated by Z, 4fr is the inclusion map of generators, and it remains to define efr. For (Z?;, efr) to be Boolean, by Definition 34, it needs to have a permit. Obviously, any such permit would be an extension of some total improvement of Q since Z c 235. On the other hand, by the freedom of i3;: Lemma 43. Let P = (I, Q) be a perception. Let a; be thefree Boolean algebra generated over 1. Evey total improvement Fof e can be uniquely extended into a total b-p-predicate: $9 x a;+ {t, f]. It follows that the Boolean extensions of the total improvements of the generating perception P are exactly all the “candidate” permits of a Boolean generation based on that the free Boolean algebra a: of connotations. For the sake of generality it is desirable all of them should be permits. The p-predicate efr will be thus defined to accommodate these possible permits (the designation zbib’ is used as in Lemma 43). all Definition 44. Let P = (25, Q) be a perception. The free b-perception over P, designated Cfr = (a;, efr), is defined: - L?;, the set of connotations, is the free Boolean algebra generated over Z. - Let Vp be the set of total improvements for all w E E and for all p E BF, by: of P. efr, the free b-p-predicate, is defined, efr(w9 B) = t f u if GE VP, p’(w, B) = t, if Q E VP, p’(w, /I) = f, otherwise. 214 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$cial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 By Definition 44 that uses all total improvements F as a basis for permits, one can conclude that cfr does what it was expected to do: Corollary 45. [fr(Z) p-morphism. is a set of generators for the Boolean algebra t?$, and tfr is a rigid Example 46. Let P be a bookstore perception of the over P would have connotations generating connotations, with b-p-predicate values that are computed by the truth tables of Lemma 42. that consist of all possible Boolean combinations as in Section 4.1. The free b-perception 7.2. Free Boolean generation as a functor The generation of a b-perception over any given perception as defined above is a mapping from the category of perceptions into the Boolean subcategory: Gfr : Prc, + Prc: : P t+ Cfr. It comes expected from the Gfr mapping, simple perception in a “methodical” manner: together with the generating morphism if it is supposed tfr: P -+ Cfr. A few things are to be to generate a b-perception over any given If twoperceptions were able to communicate f : P -+ Q, then this communication Gfr should provide an extension of f which is a b-p-morphism: as simple perceptions via a p-morphism should be preserved by Boolean generation: Gf'(f > : GfYP) + G”&?), and the diagram this is the following: in Fig. 2 should be commutative. The only definition that could do let h : l3; + 23% be the unique extension of the mapping Z+t?fj:aH f(a) into a Boolean homomorphism /I H h(B). (We still have to show that this is a b-p-morphism.) The provided communication compositions: between the Boolean generations (ii) such that Va, E Z h(u) = f(a). Define Gfr(f) by should preserve P I fr f & fr 6 I Gf’(f 1 67(P) Gf’( Q) Fig. 2. Boolean perception generation with morphisms. Z. A&Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 215 The categorical framework provides well developed concepts for the above: G” needs to from the identity functor on Prc& is that Gfr should generate very plausible expectation. The and cfr should be a natural transfomzation be afinctor, to the functor Gf*. An immediate example result of this demand isomorphic b-perceptions over isomorphic perceptions-a functor is thus a formal guarantee methodical way. This is an instance where categorization tools of scrutiny that capture certain pre-theoretical in a consistent, of perceptions provides us with intuitions about cognitive perceptions. that agents are generating b-perceptions Lemma 47. Let P = (T, e), Q = (J, 5), and Gfr(P) = (a;, efr), and Gf’(&) = (Bf;, let f :P --f Q be a p-morphism. Let rfr). Let h : B$ + B’j be the unique extension of the mapping ZiB’j:(Yt+f((Y) into a Boolean homomorphism such that V(-Y E Z h(cz) = f(a). Then the mapping GfYf> : Gf’(P) -+ GfW)> defined by: /3 t+ h(,9), is a b-p-morphism such that the diagram of Fig. 2 is commutative. The proof is given in Appendix A.2. The essence of the proof is “rooting” and all involved perceptions possible perceptions). Permits and the universal perception constitute b-perceptions and hence a basis for all proofs. the universal perception, into using permit arrows the diagram (i.e., the foundations of It also follows identities. and hence: from the definition of Sfr(f) that Gfr preserves compositions and transformation from the identity functor on Prc& to the Corollary 48. tf” is a natural functor Gf’. 7.3. Freedom of thefinctor There are additional things categorized. One of them is generality. generation. The following freedom, as illustrated by Fig. 3. to expect from the generating In categorical terms, this neatly translates functor Gfr that are easily to a free of theoretical characterization lemma uses a standard category Lemma 49. Let P be a perception. Let #’ : PrcE + Prc, b’ : P H Cf’ be as in Definition 44, and let cf’ : P -+ Gfr(P) be the rigid inclusion of generators. Then f : P -+ C there exists a unique b-p- for any b-perception C = (B, a) and anyp-morphism morphism @ : Gfr(P) + C such that tfr o 1L_ = f. Proof outline. A natural definition of I++ is similar that of Lemma 47, with C replacing Bfr( &) and I/J replacing h. q transformation in nature to the definition of Gfr( f ), and the proof is similar such as cfr always defines a free functor: the to 216 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art&id lntelligencu 102 (1998) 187-247 Fig. 3. Freedom of Boolean perception generation 7.4. Computing free Boolean perception predicates The values of the p-predicate are innate and fixed for the generating perceptions. When it comes to the Boolean closure the agent may use the truth tables of Lemma 42. These truth tables provide a deductive apparatus which may guide the computation of the values of the p-predicate directly from the generating perception. Since Z is a set of generators (1, Q). for f3;, the computation will eventually “bottom out” at the generating perception In this context we distinguish between two kinds of connotations in @: Definition 50. Let B be a connotation in t3:. - If /? E Z then it is a simple or generating connotation. If ,13 $ Z then it is a complex or derived connotation. - In free Boolean generation the subset of complex connotations from the subset of simple connotations. Since @ is generated over Z, any j3 E @ to a Boolean expression with simple connotations compute efr(w, fi), starting from its immediate perception of the simple connotations make #I and using the truth tables. is, of course, disjoint is equal as its atomic expressions. The agent can that At the end of this study, in Section 10, there is a discussion of some methodological to, and readily are discussed in Section 10.1. Simple recognized by, the sub-symbolic are assumed to be closest fallout, where simple versus complex connotations connotations sensory-motor-neural generating apparatus level artificial perception of derived connotations due recourse to the deductive apparatus. ’ connotation, (this “emergence” apparatus of an artificial agent, without further procedure. If (Y is a then the value of Q(W, cr) emerges without need of a deductive could be based, for example, on a neural network). Higher is achieved with in the Boolean closure is expected More computational effort would be needed as the expression gets more complex: implementation to be as complex as the question. An algorithmic answer the process should also detect general Boolean BF dependencies within the expression, deal with the lower right entries of the disjunction will be rewarded with more definite values. the of to truth Tables 2 and 3. It and conjunction 3 The reader is reminded is not an issue of this study. that whether or not Boolean perception provides a suitable model of human perception Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligencc~ 102 (1998) 187-247 217 7.5. Summary of Section 7 transition to b-perceptions. from basic perceptions Free Boolean generation provides a rigorous mathematical description of a methodical to basic sensory- is captured by an adequate perception this process may claim functor), open transition too free, too general. The following for a methodical Boolean generation with, perhaps, cognitive motor-neural perception, a capability of abstraction of Boolean combinations and show for fact that it is, among other things, methodical minded, and general has some good features, but it is maybe somewhat sections consist of further attempts better features. of connotations. An agent that performs and of a!$. This cognitive (freedom of the generation (the natural In addition 8. Validity and completeness in Boolean perceptions is a lattice. B-perceptions were defined The perceptual order relations of subsumptions and synonyms gave rise to the idea that that idea, and to follow the set of connotations distributive lattice: a Boolean algebra. structure a set of connotations Given a b-perception C = (f3, c~), it is thus natural to check whether the Boolean algebra captures the intended meaning. One needs to compare two order relations within the carrier set B of connotations. as a complemented - The Boolean partial order, denoted <. It is a formal construct that comes with the Boolean algebra, defined by the Boolean algebraic Law of Consistency: a</3 ifandonlyif ar\lB=_L ifandonlyif -avB=T. - The perceptual quasi-order, denoted a, and set by Definition 22: ~ if and only if VW E E a(w, (;Y) % a(w, B) This order relation emerges patterns and was extensively discussed from the agent’s perception. in Section 5.2. It describes perceptible In this context of comparison between 9 and < within b-perceptions, we define: Definition 51. A b-perception C = (a, a) is valid if, for all (;Y, /3 E B, w<p + CY~B. In a valid b-perception all the Boolean subsumptions the Boolean To justify b-perceptions reflected by the structure should be supported by perception. This was the motivation b-perceptions (see Section 6). structure, reflect perceptible o-subsumptions. should be, at least, valid: patterns for Example 52. The universal perception UC, is valid: for all A. B c E, A c B + Aa B. The corresponding concept of completeness comes immediately implication: wG/I =+ a</?. converse should be reflected by the Boolean structure. This also captures a certain the Boolean structure serving as a “mental In a complete b-perception image” that is generated by perception. the to mind, with all perceptible patterns intuition about 218 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art@ial Intelligencr 102 (1998) 187-247 Before embarking on the actual definition of completeness in b-perceptions, we need to restrict the definition of 9 for these perceptions. This extra care is warranted by the three- valued context. Assume U, fi E B, such that, for all w E &, a(w, a) = a(w, B) = u. It follows synonyms, also with their negations, and all the following a-subsumptions that, in a b-perception C = (a, a), there are two connotations, that a! and p are hold: 694, a+B, -waB> ycr+/3. If one substitutes all of them for the Boolean partial order <, one gets a degenerate Boolean -L = T. This is, of course, undesirable. The most one might want to do in this algebra: is merge the synonyms cz and /I into one connotation situation (see Section 5.1). It is also easy to verify that this kind of problem occurs only in the mentioned situation where VW E E n(w, a) = cr(w, /3) = u. Definition 53. Let C = (B, a) be a b-perception, and let a!, /I E B. Then crap if: _ VW E & a(w, a) % - There exists some w E E such that either o (w, cr) # u or o (w, B) # u. (T(w, B) as in Definition 22. We are now ready to define: Definition 54. A b-perception C = (a, (T) is complete if, for all a!, j3 E 13, agp =+ a</?. Example 55. The universal perception UC is complete: This follows directly from its Definition (4). for all A, B c I, A a B =+ A C B. Having defined validity and completeness where they hold. Validity of all b-perceptions for b-perceptions, we proceed is based on the validity of their permits: to examine Proposition 56. Let C = (i3, a) be a b-perception, let w<B, and let F? be any one of its permits. Then, for all w E E, c(w, a) 2 ?(w, 6). Proof. By the Law of Consistency homomorphism one gets (overline designates set complementation): and by the natural q :c + U& being a Boolean fl= 17(l) = Il(o A -B) = n(o) fl n(B). It follows that for no w E E could it be that both w E q(a) and w E n(p) at the same time. Hence, for all w E I and for all permits %, z(w, a) 2 z(w, /3). q By the closure condition of Definition 34 it follows that, for all w in E, also a(w, a) % a(w, B), and hence: Corollary 57. B-perceptions are valid. Example 58. By Corollary 57 free Boolean generation o, B E B$, crq3 =+ crap. of Section 7 is valid: for all 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Arrijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 219 As might have been expected, completeness is scarcer than validity. there is a connection between completeness permits. of a b-perception and the monotonicity It turns out that of its Proposition 59. In a complete b-perception all permits are monotone. Proof. Let C = (a, a) be a complete b-perception, completeness cr 9 p implies fy < j?, and by Proposition 56 this implies that, for al1 w E E, and let F? be any one of its permits. By Z(w, a) 2 F(w, j3). 0 To show incompleteness of a general free Boolean generation, recall that by generating relation them. These subsumptions the free Boolean algebra over the set Z of connotations, we ignored e-subsumptions between subsumption ($, in the general case, P has total improvements G that are nonmonotone. permits of Cfr that do not preserve a of P, and hence they are nonmonotone Cfr. It is concluded structure. The Q- in Cfr = relation tfr). In Section 5.3 it was shown that, to permits of in P = (1, Q) is a subset of the a-subsumption efr) (by rigidity of the generating morphism are not reflected by the Boolean They extend that: Lemma 60. Free Boolean generation is, in the general case, incomplete. We have thus observed two disjoint sources for the perceptual order relation 9 in a free Boolean generation: _ By validity in Cfr, tr<b “logical speculations”. They are monotone permit (i.e., any possible improvement of perception). implies that asp. These subsumptions are based on abstract in the sense that they will hold with any - Observed lawlike patterns, the e-subsumptions that hold between the generating connotations. the cause of nonmonotonicity incompleteness of C”. They are based on perceptual observations of some permits of C”‘, and also of “facts”.4 They are the cause of Complete b-perceptions constitute a subset, designated PKJF~~~. of the objects of Prc, and of Prc!. It is easy to see that: Lemma 61. Prc~cmp with b-p-morphisms is a (full 5, subcategory qf the subcategory Prci’ of b-perceptions. It was just shown that Prc! # Prcblxmp & . On the other hand, by Example 55, PrcF-cmp is not empty: the universal perception is a complete b-perception. 4 Perception follows, in this context, the scientific enquiry principle H.vpotheses nonjngo [I 1, p. 2611. 5 Full means that all b-p-morphisms between perceptions are “inherited” from R-C!, so that %F-cmp is fully determined by its collection of perceptions. 220 Z. Arzi-Gonczarmvski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligenw 102 (1998) 187-247 8.1. Completion of Boolean perceptions “moving an incomplete aab means actually changing b-perception C = (a, c). “Internalization” Consider o-subsumptions connotations, may be figuratively experimental figure out all the rest. (Eventually he may open one eye to ask for additional experimental results, namely things around” in order that a </I should hold as well. The situation all the to the situation of an analyst who internalizes lab results. That done, he may lean back in his armchair, close his eyes, and of all observed lattice of improved generating perception.) the structure of the Boolean compared We shall now use the categorical framework and Boolean (and free Boolean generation tools for a methodical in particular) of any b-perception modification so that it should not only be valid, but complete as well: the artificial agent will thus have a rigorous tool for the internalization and the creation of a meaningful cognitive of its perceptual observations image of its environment. Let C be a b-perception. t for a holds then b-p-morphism a <j3 holds as well. c could, hopefully, replace C as the agent’s b-perception. A few natural requirements cmp C -+ ??, such that c = (8, F) is complete: whenever aajl arrowed, context one is looking In the categorical, . are: _ In the case where C is already complete ccrnp should be the identity. - ccrnp should be o-monotone: the idea is to preserve the a-subsumptions, not to discard - them. tcmp should introduce a minimal modification of C: no change except for that which is needed for completeness. There are standard Boolean concepts that can neatly do what we want: to the Boolean algebra of connotations (related f?) _ The set of elements: S = {a! A -p]] crag). - Theideal A thatisgeneratedbys, _ The quotient algebra: a = B/A. _ The natural Boolean homomorphism A = (/3 E BII/~~V,~,~S). into the quotient algebra: <cmp : B + 13: /3 H [/!I] By definition of the natural homomorphism, “congruence modulo A" means [I] = [B] if and only if /I E A. [a] = [B] if and only if a G’ B. This that w A -B E A and jl A -CX E A. In particular, It is easy to see from the definitions of S, A, and a that: are integrated - a-subsumptions subsumption in B: [a] < [B]. into the Boolean algebra B: crap implies a Boolean - If C is already complete _ If B turns to be a set of connotations then S = n = (I], and hence ccmp is the identity. then, by validity, for a b-perception tcrnp will - define a a-monotone tcmp introduces ideal that includes S. p-morphism. the minimal necessary modification of a, because A is the smallest a is thus the candidate set of connotations that B is not a degenerate Boolean algebra). 6 cmp is the candidate for c (in Appendix A.3, Lemma A.4, it is shown for the b-p-morphism Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$cial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 221 onto ??. It remains expected manner: to properly define a p-predicate for ??. This will be done in the obviously Definition 62. Let C = (B, a) be a b-perception. consists of: Its completed perception, ?? = (13, (T), - a as defined above is the Boolean set of connotations; - the p-predicate a : E x B -+ (t, f , u), where: a(w, L/31) = t f if Jo! Z B such that a(w, a) = t, if 3c~ Z B such that cr(w, a) = f, u otherwise. In Appendix A.3, Proposition A.6, it is shown that there is no conflict in the definition. To establish the legitimacy of the construction, we show in Appendix A.3, Proposi- tion A.7 through Corollary A. 13, that: - ?! has permits. Its permits are, exactly, all the monotone permits of C (it is also shown that C does have monotone permits). - The p-predicate ?Y answers the closure condition for b-perceptions, from Defini- tion 34. - ccmJ’ defines a b-p-morphism. The main result of this section (proven in Appendix A.3) is: Lemma 63. Let C = (t3, a) be a b-perception. Dejinition 62 is a complete b-perception. Its completed perception c = (B, F) of It is also shown (Corollary A.14) the 0 subsumptions are exactly the (T- subsumptions: no new subsumptions that are added. Example 64. Consider a completion of the free b-perception perception of Example 3. If (in-bad-shape $fr one gets also (in-bad-shape < -buy-it), is “mentally subsumption internalized”. -buy-it), as part of the Boolean structure. then in the completed perception this Intuitively, that is generated over the 8.2. Completion as a freejkctor As argued in Section 7.2, a general and methodical cognitive transition is best formalized by a free functor and a natural complet;,kierception to a The transition (as just described) will thus be formalized by a free functor (Omp) from a b-perception transformation. into Prc, the identity b-perceptions were able to communicate should provide a b-p-morphism , @“P(C) = ??, and we will show that 6 cmp is a natural transformation to the functor Gcmp. In particular, functor on the domain subcategory from if two f :C + C’, then Gcmp for communication between the completed perceptions: using a b-p-morphism G’“P(f) : G”“P(C) + G-ye’). Such that the diagram Section 8.1 predict that only monotone b-p-morphisms in Fig. 4 should be commutative. However, the results of the former f could fit into that diagram. 222 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lxhmann /Artificial Intelligencr 102 (1998) 187-247 c f(monotone) I -w III G”“*(f) G”““(C) c’ E CmP GCrnP(C’) Fig. 4. Boolean perception completion with morphisms In the general case, This may be exemplified we are familiar further Assume but f(cz)$J@), generations Gfr(P) and Gfr(Q). free generators. because Boolean generations: In Gfr(Q), f(cr)$f(B). so that f there may be b-p-morphisms in Pt-I$ in the context of free b-perception that are nonmonotone. generation, with which from Section 7: assume that P communicates, that, in a given perception P = (Z, Q), sag. using f : P -+ Q, with a perception Q = (3, is non-e-monotone. f(cr)gf(B), f can be extended In Gfr(P), aafi because to a b-p-morphism the respective Consider holds, but a@ f(a) t), free Boolean because a and B are and f(B) are free generators and free the respective between G”(f) : GfYP) + GfY&L and this extension preserves ,f(P) (see Fig. 2), so that 4”V)(Q@(f)(B). Let us now “complete” respectively. Gfr(f) complete b-perceptions, the b-perceptions G”(P) and G”(Q), cannot be properly extended to a b-p-morphism into Gfr(P) and Gfr(&), these between since now OI<~ but f(cz)gf(p). Example 65. Consider two “bookstore ” “customer” perceptions as in Example 3. Assume so that h ear&of-it)), that P communicates, them. h can be extended iheard-of-it). t), but using (a! &,a), is non-e- Assume that, in P = (1, Q), (buy-it with a perception Q = (3, (h(buy-it)gh(h monotone. The story in everyday words: P buys any book only after having heard of it. P is not certain whether he has heard about a specific book, and therefore he is also not certain whether he wants to buy that book. Q does not have the same rules, says “so what!” and is ready to buy the book in spite of not having heard of it. They are having a row because of that. They usually communicate well, but some rules of P keep causing free trouble between the respective the Boolean generations, between only, using their (namely gfr(h)) at most (e.g., perception with, perhaps, some heady but neutral lawlike structures by way of completeness should not be misleading. Humans even enjoying, complete basic apparatus they can talk about the weather-basic logical speculations). ruins communicate this kind of trouble. Artificial perceptions nonmonotonicity but it cannot be properly extended b-perceptions. P and Q could pursue “casual” communication for a multitude of motives. We are capable of containing, are conceived for practical purposes, so that between to a b-p-morphism (namely h), or free Boolean generation The anthropomorphism the communication. cannot be ignored. to a b-p-morphism Introduction of “own” Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Arfijcial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 223 s”““(C) C&, v f 3!$, “I (monotone) Fig. 5. Freedom of Boolean perception completion We are thus going to define a functor G cmp for the completion of b-perceptions subcategory, designated PK$-~~~, morphisms. Qmp will be a free functor, and [ cmp will be a natural transformation identity functor on PK~-~‘” on a that includes all b-perceptions but only monotone b-p- from the to Gcmp: Lemma 66. Let C be a b-perception. Let Gcmp . p+-mon + prC;cmp. . c b+ c, pp : c --+ G”“P(C) be as in Definition 62. Then for any other complete b-perception C’ andfor any monotone b-p-morphism that 6 cmp 0 1cf = f (see Fig. 5). ,f : C -+ C’, there exists a unique b-p-morphism $ :c + C’ such Proof. Define @ by [#?I H f(p). Clearly, since ccmp is onto. @ is a b-p-morphism a’, /I E 13, u “= B implies of Appendix A, with the Boolean monotone that of the universal perception, and _L replacing 0. q is unique that, for all that f(a) = f(B). The proof is similar to that of Proposition A.8 of C’ replacing by f being one, and by showing tcmp o $ = f, and the definition f replacing 2, completeness 8.3. Summary of Section 8 b-perceptions. observed patterns agents with b-perceptions may perform a methodical transition Artificial to complete perceptually a free functor from the subcategory of b-perceptions with monotone b-p-morphisms the subcategory of complete b-perceptions. However, b-perceptions with nonmonotone communication of is formalized by into into the Boolean structure. The process cannot pursue this communication consists of a complete after the transition. internalization transition cognitive The 9. Sketching complete Boolean perceptions In the last two sections two free generations were introduced. The first free functor, Gfr, generates a b-perception over any perception. The second one, G”“P, generates a complete them as simple mappings between sets b-perception over any b-perception. of perceptions, is both the codomain of Gf’ and the domain of G cmp, so that the mappings can be composed: then the set of b-perceptions If one considers Gfr 0 prnP : Pi-c& + PrcFXmp. 224 Z. Ar.+Gonczurowski, D. Lrhmumn /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 Fig. 6. Composite generation with morphisms. This is, however, not a legitimate composition of functors, since the domain P$-mo” of Gcmp is a restriction of the codomain D-c! of G”, and Gcrnp is undefined for the nonmonotone morphisms of PC!. The composite mapping can be applied perception P = (1, Q) . This would yield the perception to any 4fi 0 QmP (p) = c” that yield, under Gfr, nonmonotone morphisms in the previous section. We would like to study under what conditions that is valid and complete. The benefits of such a perception were discussed composite mapping does define a free functor. Such a functor, a free complete b-perceptions generation. By Section 8 one has to eliminate the p-morphisms other words, certain communication be eliminated p-morphisms, know that the resulting complete b-perceptions tion in that they have less permits.) We ask what exactly is the price in open-mindedness, paths. The non-@-monotone namely p-morphisms efr-monotone to an artificial intelligent agent the if it exists, would define from Prc& (see Fig. 6). In in ‘Prc! the generating perceptions will have to are also cases of as well. (Indeed, we already are less general than free Boolean genera- paths between for complete b-perception generation. Total improvements and some of them will have to be eliminated of C”. It seems, however, that the price is higher than that: (and total improvements) b-p-morphisms of P will obviously have to go: they extend to non- of P and in communication in total improvements Example 67. Let a, /I E Z be two generating connotations efr as in Section 6.4, for all w E E, such that, using truth tables of @(W, a) = Qf’(W, a) = Q”(W -/3) 1 . as well as /I and -cr. (In a bookstore perception Clearly, cx and -j3 are Qfr-synonyms, these could be cr = paperback Q(W, a) = Q(W, @) = u. The f-total improvement neither pair of synonyms improvement permit of Cfr, although it is e-monotone! is thus excluded into and fi = hardcover.) Assume now that, for some w E E, (of Example 27) will definitely map connotation. total it is not a Qfr-monotone perception from the domain of G ‘W because the same universal This , In Section 8 we have observed two disjoint sources for the perceptual order relation +: the Boolean < and the observed 9. However, the last example is neither a free Boolean Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$ciaE Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 225 nor a e-synonym subsumption, traces of some Boolean structure forces us to discard p-morphisms or subsumption. There could be “links of a third kind’, in generating perceptions. Complete Boolean generation that are not committed to that structure. 9.1. Boolean sketches Boolean It is a useful sketches are formal structures that capture tool for definition structure in of complete generating perceptions. Boolean generation. Let K be a set. We designate by KBE the set of all Boolean expressions over K. Clearly, elements of lCBE can be identified with elements of any Boolean algebra B that includes K, and, in particular, with elements of the free Boolean algebra over K, t3:. A Boolean Sketch consists of a set K, together with a quasi-order on KBE designated that extends the usual Boolean partial order. Formally: traces of Boolean and understanding Definition 68. A Boolean sketch is a pair (K, R) where: - K is a set. - R is a quasi-order on KBE. _ R has a Boolean proper@ let <bt-fr designate the Boolean partial order on BE, then for all Boolean expressions er , e2 E KBE, el <&fr e2 implies that el Re2. Hence the smallest quasi-order R for (K, R) is R = <bl_fr. Example 69. Every Boolean algebra B is a Boolean sketch (B, <). Example 70. If A c B is any subset of the elements of a Boolean algebra 13 then (A, <) is a Boolean sketch. The following example is the Boolean sketch that we need: Example 71. Let P = (1, Q) be a perception, and let q,,” be the perceptual order relation of the free b-perception Cfr = (a;, efr), then (1, a+,) is a Boolean sketch. Q has the required Boolean property by validity of Cfr. Clearly, 9 of (Z, Q) is included in +, but there are other sketch subsumptions and synonyms, as well as other relationships in (1, !,r,). We designate, for all x, y E KBE: - x subsumes y if xRy. - x1 y are synonyms - x, y are disjoints if x R-y _ x, y are complements _ x, y are antonyms if x Ry and y Rx. and y R-x. if -x Ry and -y Rx. if they are both disjoints and complements. in (1, qprr), if x, y are atomic expressions and x subsumes y, then one gets the and It is easy to see that, Clearly, familiar e-subsumption, antonyms cannot be expressed with Q-synonyms and subsumptions. for all expressions x, y E 1: and the same goes for synonyms. Disjoints, complements, 226 Z. Aui-Gonczurowski. D. Lehmann /Arti$ctul Intrlli~encP 102 (1998) 187-247 - They are disjoints if and only if for all w E &: ~(w,x)=t+~(w,~~)=f and ~(w,y)=t+~(w.x)=f. - They are complements if and only if for all w E E: @(w,x)=f+~(w,y)=t and ~(w,y)=f+e(w,x)=t. - They are antonyms if and only if for all w E E: ~(w,x)=t+~(w,y)=f and ~(w,y)=t+&w.x)=f. The Boolean suspected before. sketch structure is thus capable of capturing “links of the third kind” as Example 72. In a bookstore perception, _ edition 1 subsumes -paperback. - paperback and -hardcover are synonyms, the following patterns could exist: and hence paperback and hardcover are antonyms. - For N # h4 priceN and priceA are disjoints. This is actually an observation that a book can have at most one price in the given environment. _ ISBNn and V(ISBNk]++, are complements. This is actually an observation that a book must have some ZSBNi in the given environment. and V(publisherK}K+iv _ publisherN are antonyms. This is actually an observation that a book must have exactly one publisher in the given environment. this is only an example of one possible perception with a specific environment. Indeed, In that There may be environments case the last item above would not hold. As explained before, perceptions are not meant to reflect patterns that are necessarily “universal”. that feature, for instance, books that are co-published. In Example 2 “families” of connotations were observed (such as topic connotations, etc.). The formulation title connotations, other Boolean patterns) as above intrinsically the “quality dimensions” of a “conceptual “families” will be naturally integrated of disjoints, complements defines these families, space” suggested by GLdenfors and antonyms similar (and in spirit to [2 l-231. These into the Boolean structure. Mappings between Boolean sketches that preserve the sketch structure will be a useful concept for complete Boolean generation. To be able to formulate the preservation of the sketch structure, one first needs to define the meaning of a set mapping when applied to the Icz Boolean expressions over the set. This will be done in the obvious way: Let .f’ : K 1 + ICfE. By replacing every atom a E ICI in the be a set mapping. We define f’ : KyE + is formally done by domain expressions by f(a) E K2 in the target expression. This induction on the structure of the expression: if e = -e’ then f(e) = -f(e’), if e = a E ICI then f(e) = f(a), etc., . Definition 73. Let (Xl, RI) and f:Kl KyE, el Rle2 implies that f(el)Ra,f’(ez). -+ Ic2 is a Boolean Sketch Morphism (X2, R2) be two Boolean f‘: (Kl. RI) + sketches. A set mapping (X2, R2) if, for all el.e2 E Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /AriQicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 221 Example 74. Boolean algebras are a special case of Boolean sketches (as in Example 69). In that case Boolean homomorphisms them are Boolean sketch morphisms. between Example 75. Consider a Boolean sketch as in Example 70. The restriction of a Boolean that is generated by A is a Boolean sketch homomorphism morphism. on the relevant subalgebra The sketch morphisms that we are after are arrows between Boolean sketches (I, +) as in Example 7 1. The following lemma follows directly from the definitions: Lemma 76. Let f : P --f &heap-morphism (“5, t fr) be the corresponding free Boolean generations. Then (P = (Z, Q), & = (J, 5)). Let (a$, ef’) and f : (Z, $“) --f u-, a,fr) is a Boolean sketch morphism if and only if Sf’(f> : G”(P) -+ G”(Q) is N e’r-monotone b-p-morphism. sketches of Boolean The connection Lemma 76 provides “survive” a natural transformation ones that are sketch morphisms. Establishing will lead to a better understanding the required is obvious now. to the issues of this section that are able to the p-morphisms information that is based on the composite mapping efr o ccmp: the for that the formal categorical framework about of the completion process. Lemma 77. Boolean sketches with sketch morphisms morphisms are dejned at the set level) form a category (composition and the identity sketch Definition 78. Let P = (I, Q) and Q = (J, morphism if the set mapping f defines a Boolean sketch morphism t). f : P -+ Q is a sketch structured p- f: (2, a,tr) + (3, $tr). there are monotone Example 79. Sketch structured p-morphisms However, the f-total and the t-total necessarily preserve sketch complements, are, as in Examples 33 and 67, based on cases where u and fi are complements, or antonyms, but some w E E is such that Q(W, cr) = Q(W, j3) = u. are monotone. such arrows that are not sketch structured. For instance, improvement of Examples 27 and 28 do not disjoints, or antonyms. The counter examples disjoints, improvements improvement and (total) To restrict oneself to consideration of perceptions with sketch structured morphisms only, another subcategory of perceptions is introduced. Definition 80. Prci’, the sketch structured subcategory of perceptions, consists of: - all the perceptions of Prc&; - sketch structured p-morphisms only. 228 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 Fig. 7. Complete Boolean perception generation with morphisms. Obviously, Prczk IS a subcategory of Prc, and of Prep Example 81. Consider perception P features the sketch antonyms the sketch structured paperback and hardcover then all the sketch structured p-morphisms pattern: subcategory of bookstore perceptions. If a h from this perception should preserve that h@perback) and h(hardcover) should be sketch antonyms in h(P). We are now finally ready to define the functor that generates a complete b-perception over any given perception, (by Lemma 76). and freedom properties and to show its natural transformation Corollary 82. Dejine the functor Gfrqmp : Prep -+ PrcyCmP by: @-J(p) = Q’ 0 G’“P(P), g=“‘P(f) = g’ 0 q”“(f), - then tfr o tcrnp : (T, Q) + Cfr is a natural transformation from the identityfunctor on Prczk to thefunctor SfrxmP, Gfrxrnp is free, and communications are preserved diagram of Fig. 7 is commutative. in a way that the 9.2. An internal view offree complete Boolean generation Boolean sketches and the sketch structured subcategory of perceptions have enabled the over any given percep- of definition of a free generation GfrXrnp of a complete b-perception tion. This is the global, categorical framework. It provides an external characterization -- @=mp(P) = (a;, err). Having defined Boolean - efr in terms of the generating perception P = (Z, Q), rather than in the general Definition 62. sketches, one can further acquire characterizations of $ and terms of We start with the characterization for free complete Boolean generation. Given a Boolean sketch (K, R), the quasi-order R (with its algebra of connotations of the Boolean 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmnn /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 229 Fig. 8. The free sketch structured Boolean algebra “Boolean property”) provides a “sketchy” algebra over K. Sketch synonyms and antonyms should all be built theoretical procedure, one is looking about the structure of some Boolean information and subsumptions, disjoints, as well as complements, into this Boolean algebra. By the standard category- for a Boolean algebra L3p and a sketch morphism Lemma 83 (See Fig. 8). Let {K, R) be a Boolean sketch. In l?: (thefree Boolean algebra over K), let AR be the ideal that is generated by the set S = (el A -ez(lel Rez}, let t32 = @/AR be the quotient Boolean algebra, and let tSk : BE -+ BF be the natural Boolean homomorphismfrom the Boolean algebra onto its quotient algebra. Then for every other Boolean algebra 23 and every sketch morphism f : (K, R) -+ f? there exists a unique Boolean homomorphism + : Bg + x3 that is a homomorphic extension off : for all cy E K, = f(a). Z?E will be called the free sketch structured Boolean algebra over Sk o $(a) C K, R). Proof outline. The proof is similar to that of Lemma 66 in Section 8.2, using the freedom that are congruent modulo AR are mapped by the of i?E, and showing sketch morphism f to the same element of 8. q that connotations Replacing the general (Kc, R) by (37, Q), one gets the free sketch structured Boolean algebra over (I, Q), designated 23, . Sk On the other hand, in the general Boolean con- struction of Section 8.1, one may replace above replaces A and one gets the following characterizations, perception P: - @r = gsk Z’ < cmp = <Sk, Z (@, efr) for C = (B, 0.). In that case AR in terms of the generating It remains to fathom the permits of free complete b-perceptions and their p-predicates. - theoretical The categorical Definition 62 provides into efr. the universal perception 24~ instead of the general C in the freedom By substituting Corollary 82 of Gfrsrnp, one can see that the permits of the free complete b-perception over P = (Z, Q) are exactly the Boolean extensions of the sketch structured of P. It was shown in Section 8.1 that G frXmP(P) has permits, and hence every P has sketch structured support but not much insight total improvements total improvements. The internal view of free complete b-perception characterization. by the following generation is recommended.) can thus be summarized (A comparison with Definition 44 of free Boolean generation 230 Z. A@Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intdigenca 102 (1998) 187-247 Lemma 84. Let P = (I, Q) be a perception, @*“P(P) = (By, ecmp), is such that: then the,free complete b-perception over P, - t?gk, the set of connotations, sketch (Z, +). is the free Boolean algebm generuted over the Boolean _ Let Vgk be the set of all sketch structured total improvements of P, then ecmp, the free complete b-p-predicate, is defined, for all w E E and for all B E t?;k, by: _ The generating morphism : (z, Q) cf (BF, ecmp) ILI otherwise. is tSklz - Indeed, efr = ecmp. Th e c h aracterizations introduced by Lemma 84 are in terms of the generating perception P. 9.3. Boolean generations: evaluation and tying of ends to make a methodical free Boolean generation The artificial agent, endowed with a basic perception and willing transition to a b-perception, cognitive is enhanced by the and free complete Boolean generation. This flavor of “self-awareness” categorical the that allows a rigorous comparison between choice, it can be argued, possibly using the agent’s own data. Both processes are natural transformations now has a choice between and both are general. the two. Whatever framework and improvement the two generations are along a tradeoff of its cognitive Boolean it ignores all perceptually in that it retains all communication The most obvious differences between in that it does not rule out any future possible line on one side and completeness on the other side: free generation paths (i.e., p-morphisms) with between open-mindedness is more open-minded other perceptions, that of its perception. For that purpose to it might have been able to notice. Free complete generation it stops non- gain completeness (loosely: “those that do not agree with structured communications with other perceptions observed patterns”), and it rules out some its conjectures that future improvements are based on perceptually observed patterns”). The elimination of the non sketch structured p-morphisms might not be a loss after all. Actually, one gets a means of distinction (see Example 65). Sketch structured between “deeper” and “shallower” communications in a certain sense, similar p-morphisms In a case where cognitive more than one p-morphism it is clear that a sketch structured one, if it exists, should be “preferred’. that are based on perceptually of its perception observed patterns is less open-minded: (loosely: “those that would defy its conjectures inner images, and this communication the similarity. two perceptions, that possess, enhances could communicate between image of the environment between perceptions communicate Another issue for comparison is combinatorial. Boolean set of connotations with 22” elements largest possible Boolean closure. In particular, be already Boolean, free Boolean generation Free Boolean generation connotations. for n generating if the generating perception happens creates a It is the to that and it leads to a to “sense” is unable Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$cial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 231 structure and to completeness. Whatever combinatorial both to Boolean the generating perception has, they are built the generating already a complete b-perception minimization and hence no redundancy of connotations disaster. Free complete Boolean generation, on the other hand, is sensitive structure if and if it is is the identity. The there are no distinct synonyms then free complete Boolean generation is maximal: of the number of connotations it will only be completed, into the Boolean closure. in free complete Boolean. is already Boolean, traces of Boolean In particular, perception The above “smallest Boolean closure” feature of free complete Boolean generation has to a smaller quotient in the free other effects. The transition algebra means, inevitably, a many-to-one b-p-morphism. Distinct connotations Boolean closure 23; are merged. This may, among other things, of perception. In this context a few questions may be raised: from the totally free Boolean closure involve some unblurring _ The generating morphism cfr of free Boolean generation was shown Is this also true of the generating morphism to rigidly tSk preserve of free complete Boolean generation? the generating perception. _ In free Boolean generation there is a clear distinction between simple and complex are perceived with no need of computation, the generating connotations connotations: while derived, connotations need computation b-perceptions. Simple connotations might get merged with complex ones. and to be perceived, This distinction may be lost with free complete are Boolean combinations of simple connotations - How do these modifications to perceptions affect the computation of the free complete p-predicate? The answer to these questions is best illustrated by an example: and In particular, let (~~a,,,,3 A 1~). Example 85. Let P = (1, e) be a perception, where ol, /3, y E 1 are connotations. Let that, for some w E E, (#?a~), it is possible for u, and hence also both Q(W, B) = Q(W, v) = u. In that case @(w, cr) is either efr(w, a). However, by the definitions of Section 8, not only (B A -y E A), but also that, for all w E E, ecmn(w, #l A 1~) = f, as well as (a A -(/I A 1~) E A). It follows ~~“P(war\-(DA-v))=f,andhenceitmustbethat~ cmp(~. a) = f. It is concluded that p-predicate values involving a simple connotation cy might have to be unblurred, cx might 1. This should, of course, affect computation of get merged with the bottom connotation that have cz as an atom. --XX is, of course, merged for derived connotations the b-p-predicate with the top connotation T and the unblurring is from u to t. For a more specific example, let P be the “bookstore catalog” perception of Example 2. Let (B = tmvelguide), (Y = maps), (a = no-map-travelguide). If travelguide subsumes maps, and no-map-travelguide then a complete b-perception with these subsumptions would not consider of a w-element with the connotation hence its basic apparatus does not definitely no-map-travelguide, rule out the option. subsumes (travelguide A-maps), the possibility even if the book is closed and One might say that by freely generating a complete b-perception, the agent internalizes the Boolean sketch subsumptions to a point where it affects its basic perception. 232 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 all the experimental to a situation where our analyst lab results (namely perceptual observations), In Section 8.1 we compared complete b-perception to the situation of an analyst who internalizes leans back in his armchair, closes his eyes, and figures out ail the rest, eventually opening an eye to of the generating perceptions by free complete Boolean query the lab again. The unbluning generation may be compared its perception is undefined at a certain point, Q(W, ~1) = u, for all he knows, it must be that w should have (lack) (Y, or else “he has it all wrong” (by Section 2.4 his conjectures are based, logic). In scientific research terminology, after all, on partial perception and nonmonotonic if (ack, ecmp ) is a “theory”, then an experiment where the definite value of Q(W, w) is tested is one possible experiment for the verification of the theory. This is one of the cases where our analyst (i.e., the higher reasoning module) might want to query the lab (i.e., the sensory-motor-neural module) for improved perception. If he gets the unexpected value for p(w, a) he will open the other eye, too. that although realizes intuitive These structured another version with a closure condition considerations formalized by a closure of the sketch subcategory of perceptions. Definition 80 of that subcategory will now have can be neatly (just like that of Definition 34 of b-perceptions): Definition 86. Prep, the closed sketch structured subcategory of perceptions, consists of _ perceptions P = (Z, Q) of Prc, such that, if V, Sk is the set of all sketch structured total improvements of P, then for all w E & and for all cx E Z, @(wya)= t f ifGEVg, F(w,@)= t, if%EVg, G(w,@)=f, - sketch structured p-morphisms only. I U otherwise; total improvements if, and only if, all sketch Remark 87. ‘P has to be unblurred structured the p-predicate at this point. In terms of Appendix A.3, this could happen if, and only if, either cx or YY are elements of Ao. It follows that such an unblurring depends only on u (and not on w). This could be meaningful of P and hence all Qfrmonotone permits of Cfr, unblur for a certain pair (w, a) implementations. for algorithmic For a known price in “open-mindedness” (some p-predicates have to be modified: the agent “closes its mind” to certain possibilities), the closed version PrcEk of the sketch structured subcategory Prczk settles that: - For all P E Prc?, - The computation “bottoms-out” algorithmic the p-morphism of ecmp using tSk : P + @xmP(P) is rigid. truth tables similar to those of Section 6.4 still level. (Remark 87 should be useful for at the generating perception implementations.) the free complete b-p-predicate Q cmp using Free complete b-perceptions may compute of Section 6.4. Detection of Boolean dependencies’ the disjunction by more definite values. Only now there are more such dependencies are indeed more complex than free Boolean perceptions. One to those in agk (the lower right entries of truth tables of Lemma 42) will be rewarded, as always, to free truth tables similar and conjunction (compared 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$cial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 233 Boolean generation), This should not be surprising: cognitive model, complex questions. so that there is both more to look for, as well as more to be gained. internal to more in the agent’s to come up with more answers as more efforts are being the agent should be expected invested As some distinctions between simple and complex connotations fade away, it may be cx E Z, and for some non-atomic expression e E KBE, and hence they are merged in ( B:k, ecmp). In the case where efforts is a apparatus, and recognized by the sensory-motor-neural formal description of a pretzel shape. Q(W, pretzelshape) = t should be but ecmp(w, fi) is immediate because a that the derived formal description of a pretzel shape has is merged with a simple one, for instance, a case where w is a pretzel, pretzelshape that, for some generating connotation a and e are Qfr-synonyms, a very complex connotation could be reduced. Consider, simple connotation, B is a complex immediate. complete b-perception means been internalized: #l = pretzetshape holds in the Boolean algebra of connotations efr(w, @) necessitates later computational computation, holistically i?gk. 9.4. Summary of Section 9 from basic perceptions transition In addition Free complete Boolean generation provides a rigorous mathematical direct methodical cognitive image of the environment. generation, own perceptual observations Boolean speculations, for all it knows. The mathematical the more general free Boolean generation and this generation. description of a inner free Boolean this process may claim and show for fact that its interesting material on top of the general rely on the Boolean algebra of connotations framework allows for a detailed comparison between to the features of the more general so that it can completely to a valid and complete contribute enough that performs an agent its perception is very general. create an internal Artificial perceptions observe and, consequently, image of their on the to feature neither mistakes, It might be somewhat clumsy due to the huge size of its set of lots of effort in its environment. An agent with a free b-perception will never jump other hand, nor novel observations. connotations. An agent with a free complete b-perception has invested cognitive novel observations. On the other hand, some of them may be “far-fetched”, because agent jumped in its cognitive perception. the to conclusions. Such an agent may also feature some welcome “shortcuts” to come up with some interesting, image of the environment and it is expected It is not going to a conclusion, 10. Methodological fallout and some AI perspectives 10.1. Intermediate Boolean generations and embodied perception The two canonical Boolean generations c R c GPfi, could determine two extremes. A relation R, where another Boolean sketch and ideal (I c AR c A, <t,-rr where a is as in Section 8.1). For free Boolean generation it is the case that R = &,_fr, and for free complete Boolean generation R = gpfr. In a typical case an agent’s perception is, probably, somewhere between a free b-perception and a free complete b-perception. represent In 234 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$cial intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 a typical situation between hard to handle. For humans expertise even in a restricted, may be other reasons subsumptions the p-predicate the agent has computed and internalized only some of the subsumptions its connotations. Boolean sketch subsumptions may get arbitrarily complex and and take a lifetime of intense contemplation it may sometimes to internalize all perceptually observed patterns, and their logical consequences, specialized, professional for the preference of a specific, “intermediate” there R. A subset of (crag] may be, for instance, supported by more positive definite values of (i.e., more w in & such that ~(w, a) = t and also Q(W, B) = t). environment E. Besides complexity, Out of the entire collection of intermediate Boolean generations, attention. Free monotone Boolean generation the Boolean set of connotations the quasi order 9. (Alternatively: with the partial order 2.) The set of permits for that b-perception Boolean extensions of monotone generation one merits special is defined for R = G&f,. U a. In that case that is generated over Z with that is generated over Z* consists exactly of the total improvements of the generating perception, and this is free over the monotone subcategory is the free Boolean algebra the free Boolean algebra l+cp. Free monotone as the generating subsets of connotations in the Boolean closure If one started from such a set of connotations generation merits special attention because of the special role that generating connotations play in perception. From the Boolean theoretic point of view there are many alternative that could serve as generators. Some of them might even seem easier to work with then others. Assume, for example, a set of free generators for Bik, the sketch structured Boolean algebra of set, then free connotations. generation would be the same as free complete generation. However, we let the agent start from “its own” set of generators 1, the set of simple connotations. This set is assumed treatment must provide for an arbitrary to be perception that set of generating connotations. This approach perception to be innate to the agent’s architecture, hard-wired apparatus. They have and natural means of relating an integrity of their own, serving as the most immediate to Btk, for example, would to its environment. have meant that all the sketch subsumptions are innate to the agent’s own architecture and sensory-motor-neural that different environments adapt itself easily to some new environments. apparatus. This is not always a reasonable assumption. Considering is subjective and embodied. Generating is based on the background assumption this perception will not be able to from the set of free generators specific, so that the categorical feature different patterns, in its sensory-motor-neural are assumed connotations Starting The analog in human perception are basic level categories (sometimes also called in [38]. They were isolated by to learn, remember, and use. They are characterized, level of human interaction with the external environment. natural properties or natural kinds) extensively elaborated empirical studies as a significant They are the easiest things, by fast identification, shape (gestalt perception). elephants. of giraffe from another.) Analogous categories, motor-neural image and shortest lexemes ideas are analogous is assumed expression. This gestalt perception among other single mental images, shortest lexemes, and overall perceived tigers from It is at this level that humans easily distinguish (One level down things are more difficult. It is harder to distinguish one species to the ease of cognitive processing of basic level human recognized by the sensory- apparatus of an artificial agent, without further procedure. The single mental to the fact that a! is an atomic connotation to be embodied in the architecture of the simple connotations to be readily are assumed Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 235 to the deductive apparatus. This calls for an algorithmic agent. Perception of derived connotations recourse involve access and retrieval procedures: a resource consuming to let the agent’s internal It is reasonable in the Boolean closure is achieved with due treatment which might cognitive effort. imagery be organized at the natural level of connotations. This is why the categorical generators. There is nothing its generating specific set of connotational gives them an objective inferences using Boolean perceptions may be figuratively described as moving along the sloping lines of the lattice graph. In that case the generating connotations that facilitate navigation. They are a form of representation treatment assumes a perception that in generating connotations to the agent. Reasoning status external and making are like glittering signposts of the embodiment of perception. and synonyms between that these are observed on expressions. Ockham’s razor is two familiar signposts. Boolean sketch subsumptions, In free monotone Boolean generation connotations are internalized. generating first, like an easy path between the other hand, necessitate complex Boolean connotational also in favor of simpler patterns. support for the preference of subsumptions only subsumptions It should be expected also comes simple Another the problem connotations of projectibility, between derived Boolean connotational expressions are not only harder to arrive at, they often seem far-fetched, counterintuitive, nonprojectible. in 1251. Inferences from arguments and synonyms explained inference inductive between about and 10.2. Constraints and imagination in Boolean perception (except are actually by b-perceptions that are internalized features no constraints constraints. Free the obvious Boolean ones). Free Subsumptions Boolean generation complete Boolean generation could be regarded as the result of the cognitive of constraints. The essence of generating the connotations they are perceived as impossible, of these connotations, which constitute top T, and perceived as positive constraints. the quotient Boolean algebra over an ideal is that of the ideal are “beamed down” to the bottom I of the quotient algebra, the negations the respective dual filter, are “beamed up” to the and hence negative constraints. Dually, internalization and abstraction. There may be connotations The generation of complete b-perceptions, with its restriction of the set of possible total flavor, yet one can show that it is still capable of improvements, may have a conservative that do not have a definite some imagination positive example but they do not generate negative constraints. Dually, their negations do not have a definite negative example, yet they do not generate positive constraints. Figuratively, permit) where a w-element has (lacks) a connotation (negative) example. free complete Boolean generation can conceive a situation that has no current definite positive (formally: has a To show the above, one needs to find generating connotations - There exists some w’ E E where either ~(w’, a) = t and Q(w’, B) = u, or Q(w’, a) = does not hold, neither do such that: as/I a$ u and ~(w’, p) = f. In that case the subsumption Q~,,/I and (~g,,cmpp. However: 236 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Arfijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 _ There exists no w E & such that Q(W, a) = t and Q(W, #I) = f. In that case it is there for a! to subsume B in some future of that perception, improvement possible is no counterexample. In that case: -e cmp(w’, a! A -B) = u, so that the connotation u A -/3 is not a negative constraint: 0!r\-B#_L. _ For no w E & does the connotation a A -/3 hold. VW E & Q”(w, u A -/3) # t. like a! A-B above show that free complete Boolean generation Connotations of imagination. Such connotations generate negative constraints. Dually, negative example, yet they do not generate positive constraints. is still capable have no definite positive example, yet they do not are connotations with no definite their negations Example 88. In our bookstore environment, no w-element is definitely both children and -bigprint, let (CY = children) and (fi = bigprint), then but such a book is conceivable. In Section 5.2 a similarity was shown between Lukasiewicz’s three-valued conditionals (i). crag three-valued (and synonyms): conditional. One case, It turns out that this is exactly if and only if for all w E E t -+ f, and our definition of subsumptions Q(W, a) + Q(W, p) is t by Lukasiewicz’s where this does not hold yields an f value, while the other two cases (t --+ i and i -+ f) yield an indefinite value that was made above. The second case that yields an f value was eliminated while the cases that imagination. These are, actually, yield an indefinite value were the ones that demonstrate examples of (con)notations without denotations, that free complete generation leaves room for abstraction: an inner representation actually perceived. The distinction between conceivable and inconceivable of a suitable permit. Of course, if a perception only permit: total perceptions things which are is the existence then it is its one and leave no room for imagination. is totally two-valued, that goes beyond the distinction showing 10.3. Perception morphisms revisited Perceptions vary across agents, modules, tool of comparison and transition between versatile tool that is able to capture a variety of cognitive processes: time, situations, goals, interests, etc. The main them are p-morphisms. P-morphisms provide a _ Perhaps the most obvious use of a p-morphism (set-isomorphism, etc.) carries meticulous perceptions of the same environment &, as shown in our “bookstore” this case the nature of the mapping impossible are. The extent of the modification to the extent of the change that has caused it. In an AI environment could be used to: l Communicate l Communicate that is introduced by a p-morphism information one-to-one, is to “translate” between different examples. In onto, Boolean, about how close these perceptions is proportional these p-morphisms and compare between distinct agents. and compare between different modules of the same agent. Different If the representations for their different purposes. independently of the sensory-motor- modules may use different reasoning module, for instance, was planned neural module, it may well be that the former assumes a perception that is different Z. Arzi-Gnnczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligmce 102 (1998) 187-247 237 from the agent’s own generation. A suitable p-morphism would have to be used to bridge between if at all possible, carries meticulous them. The nature of the mapping, about how well they fit. information l The essence of some learning, discovery and other creative cognitive processes representation (i.e., set of connotations) the most suitable and goals. The shift in perception, for a if possible, should be best is in finding given environment formalized by a p-morphism. - The current study was mostly dedicated representation capture high-level and shape a structured representation processes. The study further provided constructions might cost a communication. to the construction that formation: starting from a basic perception, organize that can be further used for high-level cognitive tools to determine where and when certain of p-morphisms - A agent autonomous and lifelong perception perception within the same set of connotations “improving” p-morphisms. learn more about is naturally its environment. expected to constantly its change of improving is also easily captured by the family of improve This - One of the aspects of cognitive behavior is the ability to preserve an individual perception within a society of other perceptions. categorical notions provide us with convenient forms of joint perceptions. In Example 17 it was shown how to formalize several tools of scrutiny 10.4. Learning and knowledge acquisition The prime representation idea in the category of perceptions its relying only on its perception. There might be cases, however, internal where “outside advice” could save time or other computational resources. The question is exactly how and where such outside advice could be used in our context. For a given perception P = (I, Q) there are two families of “facts”: is that the agent could organize - Prima~facts. These are essentially the values of the p-predicate for all w-elements and generating connotations. - Derivedfacts, which consist of material that is derived from the primary facts: l Synonyms, subsumptions, and Boolean sketch structure. These can be attained by forms of inductive learning. l Values of the p-predicate for derived connotations, which may be computed from the primary p-predicate using the deductive apparatus from Section 6.4. Technically The insertion of derivedfacts speaking, any subset of facts could be directly entered into the agent’s memory. typically saves the time of the agent’s own processes. The at least, reach that fact all by itself. This kind of “learning by agent could, theoretically its being told” has as human analog one’s communication with the heritage of its culture, community’s the accumulative knowledge. Nobody after Newton is expected to rediscover law of gravity all by himself, one is simply being taught about it. One thus starts with all to acquire some genuine available knowledge explicitly at hand, and can use its resources there is no obvious way of telling how it got new knowledge. Once a fact is internalized, problem with the agent acquiring any subset of there. There seem to be no methodological in view of the sub- these facts “by being told’. However, there is the usual word of warning: 238 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Arti$cial Intelligmcr 102 (1998) 187-247 jectivity of perceptions, entering any fact concerning w-elements and connotations presup- poses that the interpretation of these entities is shared by the “learner” and the “teacher”. If should be used. In [ 191 it is explained how this is not the case, an appropriate p-morphism is the exchange of representations, while meanings are created within the communication individual. Even with a p-morphism, one has to trust that the two sides share meanings. to the insertion of a derived The direct insertion of primary facts is more problematic. “Telling” an agent the value fact, one of ,Q(w, o) is bypassing perception. As opposed could not always claim that the agent could, not even theoretically, reach that fact all by itself. If the agent has the definite perception of the fact Q(W, a), then it does not need “to be told” about it. If the agent’s perception has Q(W, cr) = u, it could perhaps sometimes that the insertion of a definite value saves efforts from the agent’s sensory- be claimed the agent could, for example, have checked inside the book for the motor-neural could be inserted. Not all u values of edition number, but to save efforts this information the p-predicate, however, are of this nature. apparatus: If a perception does not include either w or cr, then Q(W, CY) does not mean much. Fak- room [54]. The facts could be in ing “perception” entered into memory and retrieved at any time, but they are not grounded by perception the environment. this way brings us into Searle’s Chinese 11. Conclusion accepted It is generally true understanding that the world and thereby developing an intelligent experiencing to experiencing its environment, about its experience. “contemplate” for a valid (and possibly complete) an internal artificial perception It would thus infer and internalize internal representation. Almost forty years ago, Bar-Hillel was the first to point out the world modeling process can only be gained by actually of it. Parallel should also need to facts that are needed representation that should go on in the mind of agents. In his case it was supposed of natural language. Bar-Hillel wrote: to guide understanding . . . . We know . . . instantaneously, . . . facts by inferences which we are able A translation machine a universal encyclopedia. This is surely utterly chimerical further discussion perform stored in our memory. Though one could envisage of performing inferences, scheme that would make a machine perform such inferences circumstances pp. 160-1613 should not only be supplied with a dictionary but also with and hardly deserves any to and it is clear that they are not, in any serious sense, that a machine would be capable for a in the same or similar [5, there exists so far no serious proposal human being would perform under which an intelligent the same them. suggests that, theoretically, The theory of artificial perceptions perhaps be schemed and organized, as Boolean perceptions generated over basic sensory-motor-neural algebras are, in a certain sense, bimodal: symbolic processing using symbolic aspect of their lattice graphs with sloping the Boolean connectives, iconographic individually they have the (somewhat for every perception and environment, perceptions. Boolean tedious) aspect of the non- lines (offering eventual such encyclopaedias could and, on the other hand, 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Arti$cial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 239 themselves, shortcuts like “ladders and ropes”). Facts and inferences could be internalized by the lattice structures and reasoning processes would then perform by sliding along gratings of Boolean Environments perceptions and clinging at the nodes of simple connotations. trellises. train upon these trellises with tendrils provided by the generating stored in memories. Perceptive-cognitive rather than conventionally should The theory of artificial perceptions also provides general, categorical, tools for creating for a general account of these structures particular encyclopaedias, as well as foundations and of relationships between them. 12. Future research This is a theoretical study that proposes a foundational mathematical for Al artifacts with perceptions, Within the theoretical cognitive processes framework the ongoing that involve more then a single environment “unified standard’ for their cognitive behavior, and for dealing with them. the study of is concerned with study at a time. Although a few implementational of Boolean perception predicates, considerations were touched in the context of the the theory still calls for more research on computation complexity and implementational The categorical approach could now take a “bottom-up” theory by: issues. is inherently approach. One may test the practical applicability the theory, future research of the “top-down”. Given - designing architectures _ analyzing existing artifacts in terms of the proposed for AI artifacts in terms of the proposed theory. theory; One may start with the construction or analysis of basic artificial perceptions with simple and the perception predicate. One may proceed to environments: w-elements, connotations, then further design uniform ducts between categorical and Boolean constructs training on these basic perceptions. these perceptions using perception morphisms, the various cognitive processes, that capture Applying the terminology of this study to the environment AI artifacts its own w-elements particular perceptive-cognitive research concerning design, and analyze the primitives of this theory of artificial perceptions: w-element, the categorical primitives predicate, Boolean primitives. This relatively tidily structured reusable across a broad spectrum of cognitive activity. implementations with a reduced component (namely (morphism, domain, codomain, composition) small number of primitives predicts and the the possibility of are set, where components these artifacts) with connotations of AI research is invited itself, future to conceive, that are connotation, perception Appendix A. Technicalities are a necessary evil A rigorous mathematical theory warrants a tedious proof of various technicalities. Once forget about them (one has, however, gained sometimes, could usually The material was gathered here. No new premises or concepts are introduced tidiness and neat formulations. The price is, they are taken care of, one into the structure). insights in this appendix would have interfered with the flow of the presentation, so it in this appendix. 240 2. Ar:i-Goncrclr[~wski, D. Lehmunn /Artijciul Intrlligencu 102 (IY98) 187-247 A. 1. Technicalitiesfor Boolean perceptions For Section 6, the following considerations _ Given a perception are needed: . B -+ (t, f, u) : B ++ o (w, /3). For the current purpose (D, a) every w E E naturally defines a three-valued mapping: to regard for ,6 if and only if (I?, cr) is total, then, for all w E E, ow is a two-valued mapping, such that ~~ is undefined it is convenient the perception 0, o;, as a partial a(w, B) = u. Whenever total two-valued mapping. - { t. f) could be regarded as the two-element Boolean algebra which consists of a “top” (t, f ) is either a two-valued f only. In that case, a total a, : B + t and a “bottom” Boolean homomorphism traditionally 0, . . B -+ (t, f } could either be extended or it could not. expected or it is not. (A predicate defined on a Boolean algebra is Similarly, a partial to be such a two-valued homomorphism.) to a two-valued Boolean homomorphism, A few known Boolean algebraic results are needed as well. The first one (see, for example, [55]) is due to a natural bijective correspondence filters, and two-valued homomorphisms. between maximal ideals, maximal A mapping h : f? + V = (/I E a(l/~(B) = t) is a maximal then the dual maximal ideal. (t, f } is a two-valued homomorphism if and only filter, and the set n = {/3 E allh(/I) = f} if the set is to two-valued Extensions maximal for b-perceptions. Based on the definitions of a, above, and of 17, the natural morphism of Example 12, it is easy to show that: filter, are going to serve as an alternative together with the implied partition ideal and its dual maximal homomorphisms, touchstone into a Lemma A.1. Let C = (t?, a) he a total perception where B is a Boolean algebra. Then the natural p-morphism (of Example 12) n:c+U&:BH (wE&~~a(w,~)=t) is Boolean tj’and only $ for every w E E, oW : 13 + ( t , f } is a two-valued homomorphism. Since a permit defines a total perception which answers the conditions of Lemma A. 1, then, using it and the known Boolean results that were quoted before one gets: Corollary A.2. The following three conditions are equivalent: (i) C = (a, a) is a b-perception. (ii) For every w E & the two-valued partial mapping cr, could be extended to a two- valued homomorphism. (iii) For every w E E, t3 can be divided into a maximalJilter VW and a dual maximal ,B) = t =R B E V, and (T(w, ,B) = ,f j ideal A, such that, jar all B in 13, n(w, /3 E A,. In that case a permit L? oj’C is dejined, for all w E & and for all B E B, in thefollowing way: $B E 8, t3) = t and if/3 E A, then ;i(w, B) = f. then z(w, We shall designate by A$ the maximal ideal associated with w and the permit z, and its dual maximal filter by V%. Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Arrijcinl Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 241 In a certain sense, Corollary A.2 is the point where the present study meets the classical and two truth values. Loosely: b-perceptions into two-valued total nor two-valued, but they have the potential of evolving that admits only total descriptions theory are neither perceptions. The necessary and sufficient Boolean characterization of Corollary A.2 provides us with tools to understand b-p-predicates. Consider C = (B, a), and the set V of all its further permits. For all w E E consider the following intersections: is a proper ideal As an intersection of maximal since it is an intersection they are dual one to the other. Furthermore, by the last item of Corollary A.2 and by the second condition of Definition 34, one gets: is a proper filter. Similarly, A, ideals. Moreover, of maximal filters, V, Lemma A.3. For all w in E: V, = {/9 E Bllc~(w, ,5) = t} and A, = (B E f?l/a(w, j?) = f]. Definition 34 provided an external, categorical, definition of b-perceptions. Lemma A.3 of and sufficient for the recognition a necessary condition enables us to formulate b-perceptions “from inside”: We now prove: Lemma 41. A perception C = (t3, a) such that the set I3 of connotations algebra is a b-perception if and only iffor all w E I: is a Boolean (i) The set (/I E Blla(w, B) = t) is ajlter: (ii) The set (/I E Bllo(w, p) = f} is an ideal. (iii) The above$lter and ideal are dual one to the other: for all ,B in t?, a(w, @) = t ij and only if a(w, -/3) = f. Proof. The condition results which are part of Stone’s fundamental is necessary by Lemma A.3. It is sufficient by the following Boolean representation theorem of [Xl: l For every proper ideal A (proper filter V) there exists a maximal ideal (maximal filter) containing A (containing V). l For every proper ideal A (proper filter V) there exists a two-valued homomorphism h such that h(p) = f for all jl E A (h(j3) = t for all /I E 0). (cid:144)I Algorithm 1. One may generate a permit for a given b-perception, using a method that is ideal (filter) which is based on the general Boolean algebraic construction of the maximal used for a proof of Stone’s representation [Xl). The essence of theorem (see, for example, that construction one builds an increasing a maximal U, where, for all /3 E Ai, O~(W, /I) = f and ai(w, thus a permit of C = (I3, a). Proof is by induction as for the cited construction. { Ai)i=u,, of proper ideals, where Au = A,,, and A, is improvement pi of /I) = u. nn is is that, for every w E E, and every ordering {/li)i=t ,n on the connotations, ideal containing A,. Every ideal Ai represents a Boolean -#%) = t, otherwise ai(w, sequence 242 Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Art$ciaE Intelligencr 102 (1998) 187-247 We now prove: Lemma 42. The truth tables for the b-p-predicate o are given by Tables l-3. Proof outline. Lemma 41 provides proofs to all cases where one is able to come up with a definite (t or f) value for cr. To prove the remaining cases, where the value of (J should is the following proof be u, one needs to go back to the original Definition 34. An example in which case it is t): /I) = u, then a(w, (Y v /?) = u (unless -a&9, that if o(w, o) = a(w, is an ideal, it cannot be that a(w, o) = a(w, Since A, The value of ~(w, cx v /3) is thus either -a<B. the “only ,!I) = t. Since o is a b-p-predicate /3) = u and a(w, o v p) = f. t or u. We show that it is t if and only if The “if” part holds since, in that case, a! v fi = T (see Corollary 36). To show that a(w, o v ;i(w, (Y v 6) = t. if” part, let a(w, TV) = B(W, B) = u, and assume negatively that for all permits it follows Recall the maximal ideal A% and the maximal filter \7: of Corollary A.2. By their maximality, whenever #I is an element of A:, hence la! must be an element of AZ. This necessarily that -w&9. then a! must be an element of Oz, and implies (by AZ being an ideal) Argumentations of a similar nature can be used to prove that: _ Let a(w, cr) = a(w, /3) = u, then a(w, o A B) = u (unless cr<lj3, in which case it is f). - Let a(w, a) = f and a(w, _ Let a(w, a) = t and a(w, /I) = u, then a(w, o v ,5) = u. /l) = u, then a(w, a! A B) = u. q A.2. Technicalities for free generation of Boolean perceptions For Section 7 we provide the proof of Lemma 47 that free Boolean generation preserves morphisms: t), and let f : P -+ Q be a p-morphism. Let Lemma 47. Let P = (Z, Q) and & = (3, Gfr(P) = (a$, ef’), and Gfr(Q) = (L?$, tfr). Let h : l3: -+ L?s be the unique extension of the mapping T+Bfj:Olt+ f(a) into a Boolean homomorphism such that Va E Z h(o) = ,f (a). Then the mapping Gf’(f) : GfYP) + GfYQ), dejned by: /3 H h(B), is a b-p-morphism such that the diagram of Fig. 2 is commutative. Proof. For the proof we shall consider diagram of Fig. 2 is its “top cover”. It is first observed, using no-blur of f, improvement 3 of & implies a total improvement These into a permit 9’ of Gfr( Q) and a permit pibl of Gfr(‘P) (Lemma 43). Moreover, since these permits agree on the the “inverse pyramid’ diagram of Fig. A. 1. The that any total c of P: Vex E Z c(w, a) = Y(w, f(a)). total improvements can be uniquely respectively, extended, 2. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 243 Fig. A. 1. “Inverse pyramid” diagram. /3) = pt(w, h(p)). set of generators Z, then also, for all B in 8, pt(w, It follows that the permits of $7”( Q) define a subset of the permits of Gfr(P). Assume now that efr(w, p) # u. By definition of Q fr, for any permit e *’ of Gfr(P), p;O’(w, /3) = efr(w, /?) # u. This holds, for the permits that are defined, as above, by the permits of Gfr (Q). It follows in particular, that for any permit ?“, p’(w, h(B)) = efr(w, ,9) # u, and this holds for rfr as well: tfr(w, h(B)) = efr(w, j3) # u, so that G’(f) It is hence easy to see that the “inverse pyramid’ diagram of Fig. A. 1 is commutative. is no-blur and hence a unique, b-p-morphism. 0 A.3. Technicalities for completion of Boolean perceptions The rest of this technical appendix is quite straightforward, is needed for Section 8.1. Definition but it has to be technically 62 of the justified. We completed perception first establish that B is a not a degenerate Boolean algebra: Lemma A.4 A is a proper ideal, A # B. Proof. We are going to show that A = I? implies that one of the elements of S is generated by an “illegal” a-subsumption. First observe that: - If A = B, then VsEs s = T. - By definition of S and of 5 it follows that, for all s E S and for all w E E, o (w, s) # t . (Table 2) that there is some in the set S: there is a subset X C S, of at least two elements, It follows from the truth table for disjunction Boolean dependence suchthat,althoughforallitssubsetsY~XVwEEa(w,V,,~s)#t,V~~~s=T.Let and -s’< VsGys. By validity of X = Y U {s’}. If VsEys v s’ = T, then, - V,Eys<s’, C the above Boolean subsumptions and thus VW E & a(w, s’) = u. By definition of S, s’ = u A -j3 for some as,!?, so, for all w E E, a(w a) = a(w, /3) = u. This is a contradiction to Definition 53. q the corresponding in b-perceptions a-subsumptions, imply 244 Z. Arzi-Gunciam~~~~ki, D. Lehmann /Art@&1 Intelligence I02 (199Kj 187-247 Corollary A.5. For all w E f, CJ (w, VSEs s) # t We verify now that < cmp could be a b-p-morphism onto C. Proposition A.6 Let C = (B, cr) be a b-perception. Whenever a! Z B, then it cannot be that one of o (w, a), o (w, /I) is t and the other one is f. It follows by Corollary A.5 and validity of C that, for all w E E and for all /I) is t and Proof. j!? E A, cr(w, /3) # t. If, for some w E &, one of a(w, a), a(w, connotations the other one is f, then either B(W, a! A-B) = t, or a(w, B A -a) = t, so that a 7 B. q It remains to establish if it exists, afterwards. is monotone that C is a b-perception. (as one should expect by Proposition It is first shown that a permit of C, is shown 59). Existence Proposition A.7. Let r be a permit of c, subsumption, [a]$[B]. then u a-subsumption, asp, implies a T Proof. By construction [a]<[B]. A permit subsumption of a a a-subsumption, crs/3, a total b-p-predicate, r defines implies a Boolean subsumption, the Boolean and, by validity, implies the perceptual r subsumption [cz] 5 [/?I. q T, if it exists, induces a monotone permit, t’ = tcrnn o t of C. We are going to show that all the monotone permits of C are so induced. As always in this category of perceptions, the universal perception, U&, is the primary tool for bootstrapping technicalities. Proposition A-8. Let $ be a monotone permit of C, then (Y 2 B implies that a! and p are Z-synonyms. Proof. As a monotone permit, $ defines a monotone b-p-morphism perception which are mapped 0 follows. 55). It follows to the ld connotation), to the bottom of U& (namely (by Example is complete into the universal that connotations in A and the proposition Let $ be a monotone permit of C. By the last proposition Z? is also a permit of C, and hence: Corollary A.9. I” C has a monotone permit, then so does c. We need to show that every b-perception general permit for a b-perception was described easily modified to produce monotone permits. has a monotone permit. A construction of a in Algorithm 1 of Appendix A. 1. It can be Algorithm 2. This is similar to Algorithm is generated by both A, and A. I, except that one starts from an ideal A0 which Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann /Artificial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 245 Lemma A.lO. All the ideals (Ai)i=o., of Algorithm 2 are proper and the corresponding p-predicates ai are monotone Boolean improvements of cr. Proof outline. First show that A0 is proper. A, and to show that, for all B E A, -fi $ A,. Let fl E A, A is proper by Lemma A.4. It remains then fi 2 1. By Proposition A.6, for all w E 8, a(w, B) # t, and hence a(w, -/S) # f. It follows that -p $ A,. This completes is proper because C is a b-perception the proof that A0 is proper. We show now that a0 is a monotone Boolean improvement of m: it is an improvement since, by Proposition A.6, for all w E 8, O(W, /?) # t. It is Boolean because A0 is proper. Lastly, to show that it is monotone, let a!GB, so that cr A -B E S c A c Ao. It follows that OO(W, (Y A -B) = f, and in that case oo(w, w) 2 ao(w, B). The general induction step is similar to Algorithm 1. (cid:144)I Corollary A.ll. c has a (monotone) permit. It remains to show the closure condition of Definition 34 for c: Proposition A.12. Let C(w, [p]) = u. Then there exists some monotone permit, gl, of C, where $1 (w [p]) = f, and anotherpermit, L?z, where gz(w [/?I) = t. fi E A0 (-b E Ao). It can neither be that B E A, Proof outline. Assume negatively hence (-/I E A). We then use the closure property of C and the definition of a to contradict remaining possibility and (-B E A,), nor that /3 E A the that, for all monotone permits ;i, ??(w, #?) = f(t), that, for some y E A, and some 6 E A, /I = y q Corollary A.13. c is a b-perception, and the set of its permits consists of all the monotone permits of C. Finally we can prove: Lemma 63. A completed perception is a complete b-perception. [a]a[B] is a i;j subsumption Proof. crag. This holds if and only if crap 8 blW1. 0 if, and only if, for all monotone permits Z of C, In that case, by definition of is a a-subsumption. Corollary A.14. References [l I M.A. Arbib, E.G. Manes, Arrows, Structures and Functors-The Categorical Imperative, Academic Press, New York, 1075. 246 Z. Arzi-Gonczurowski, D. Lehmann /Artificinl InMigence 102 (I 998) 187-247 [2] Z. Arzi-Gonczarowski, D. Lehmann, Introducing the mathematical category of artificial perceptions, Ann. Math. Artificial Intelligence 23 (1998). [3] A. Asperti, G. Longo, Categories, Types, and Structures, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 199 I. [4] R.B. Banerji, Similarities in problem solving strategies. in: D.P. Benjamin (Ed.), Change of Representation and Inductive Bias, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990, pp. 183-191. [5] Y. Bar-Hillel, The present status of automatic Computers, Vol. I, Academic Press, New York, 1960, pp. 91-163. translation of language. in: EL. Alt (Ed.), Advances in [6] M. Barr, C. Wells, Category Theory for Computing Science, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995. [7] J. Barwise, J. Perry, Situations and Attitudes, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1983. [8] E.T. Bell, Men of Mathematics, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1986. (Originally published in 1937.) [9] E.A. Bender, Mathematical Methods in Artificial Intelligence, IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, 1995. [lOI P. Benjamin, A review of [5l], SIGART Bull. 3 (4) (1992). [ I l] S. Blackbum, Dictionary of Philosophy, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1996. [ 121 C. Boole, An Investigation of The Laws of Thought, Dover Publications, New York, 1958. (Originally published by Macmillan in 1854.) [ 131 F. Borceux, A Handbook of Categorical Algebra, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993. 1141 A. Chella, M. Frixione, S. Gaglio, A cognitive architecture for artificial vision. Artificial Intelligence 89 (1997)73-111. [ 151 M.A. Croon, F.J.R. Van de Vijver (Ed%), Viability of Mathematical Models in the Social and Behavioral Sciences, Swets and Zeitlinger B.V., Lisse, 1994. [16] E.R. Doughherty, CR. Giardina, Mathematical Methods for Artificial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1988. [ 171 S. Eilenberg, S. MacLane, General theory of natural equivalences, Trans. Amer. Math. Sot. 5X (1945) 23 I-294. [ 1 S] W.D. Ellis (Ed.), A Source Book of Gestalt Psychology, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London. 1938. [ 191 W.J. Freeman, Societies of Brains-A Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 199.5. Study in the Neuroscience of Love and Hate, Lawrence Erlbaum [ZO] N. Fridman, C.D. Hafner. The state of the art in ontology design, AI Magazine 18 (3) (I 997). [21] P. Gardenfors. [22] P. Gardenfors, Induction, conceptual spaces and AI, Philos. Science 57 (1990) 78-95. Three levels of inductive inference, Logic. Methodology, and Philosophy of Science IX ( 1994) 427-448. [23] P. Gardenfors, Meaning as conceptual structures, Technical Report 40, Lund University Cognitive Studies. Lund, 1995. 1241 M. Genesereth, N.J. Nilsson, Logical Foundations of Artificial Intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1987. [25] N. Goodman, Fact, Fiction, and Forecast, 4th ed., Harvard University Press. Cambridge. MA, 1983. [26] S. Haack, Deviant Logic, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1974. 1271 S. Haack, Philosophy of Logics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. [28] H. Herrlich, G.E. Strecker, Category Theory, Allyn and Bacon, Boston. MA. 1973. [29] E. Hutchins, Cognition [30] R. Jackendoff, Semantics and Cognition, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1983. [3 I] I. Kant, Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals. Hackett Publishing Company, in the Wild, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995. 1978. Indianapolis/Cambridge, 1992. Translated by J.W. Ellington. Originally published Sitten”. in 1785 as “Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der [32] J. Kay, Vive la difference! ceedings 14th International Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1995. Individualised Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence interaction with users (Invited talk), in: C.S. Mellish (Ed.), Pro- (IJCAI-95), Vol. 1, Montreal, Quebec. 1331 E.L. Keenan, L.M. Faltz, Boolean Semantics [34] D. Kirsh (Ed.), Special Volume on Foundations of AI, Artificial Intelligence 47 (1991). 1351 D. Kirsh, Foundations of AI: the big issues, Artificial for Natural Languages. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1985. Intelligence 47 (1991) 3-30 (Special Volume on Foundations of AI). 1361 S. Kleene, Introduction of Mathematics, Van Nostrand, New York, 1952. 1371 S. Kripke, Semantical considerations on modal logic, Actd Philos. Fenn. I6 (1963) 83-94. Z. Arzi-Gonczarowki, D. Lehmann /Artijicial Intelligence 102 (1998) 187-247 241 [38] G. Lakoff, Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things-What Categories Reveal about the Mind, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1987. [39] F.W. Lawvere, Tools for the advancement of objective in: J. Macna- mara, G.E. Keyes (Eds.), The Logical Foundations of Cognition, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 1994, pp. 43-55. logic: closed categories and toposes, [4O] M.R. Lowry, Strata: problem reformulation and abstract data types, in: D.P. Benjamin (Ed.), Change of Representation (411 J. Lukasiewicz, Many-valued and Inductive Bias. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990, pp. 41-66. systems of propositional logic (1930). in: S. McCall (Ed.), Polish Logic, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1967. [42] _I. Lukasiewicz. On 3-valued logic (1920), in: S. McCall (Ed.), Polish Logic, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1967. [43] S. MacLane, Categories [44] F. Magnan, G.E. Reyes, Category for the Working Mathematician, theory as a conceptual Springer, Berlin, 1972. tool in the study of cognition, in: .I. Macnamara, C.E. Reyes (Eds.), The Logical Foundations of Cognition, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994, pp. S7- 90. 1451 J.A. Makowsky, Mental images and the architecture of concepts. in: R. Herken (Ed.), The Universal Turing Machine-A Half Century Survey, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1988, pp. 453465. reasoning, Artificial Intelligence 13 (1980) 27-39. form of nonmonotonic J. Doyle, Nonmonotonic logic I, Artificial Intelligence 13 (1980) 41-72. intelligence prepares for 2001, AI Magazine 4 (4) (1983). [46] J. McCarthy, Circumscription-a [47] D. McDermott, [48] A. Newell, Unified Theories of Cognition, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990. [49] N.J. Nilsson, Artificial [SO] N.J. Nilsson, Eye on the prize, AI Magazine 16 (2) ( 199.5) 9-17. [51] B.C. Pierce, Basic Category Theory for Computer Scientists, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 1991, [52] R. Reiter, A logic for default reasoning, Artificial Intelligence 13 (1980) 81-132. [53] R. Reiter, Nonmonotonic [54] J.R. Searle, Minds, Brains, and Action, Harvard University Press. Cambridge. MA, 1984. [S5J R. Sikorski, Boolean Algebras, Springer, Berlin, 1964. [S6] M.H. Stone, The theory of representations [S7] R. Turner, Logics for Artificial Intelligence, Ellis Horwood Ltd, Chichester, 1984. [5X] R.F.C. Walters, Categories and Computer Science, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991. [S9] R.M. Zimmer, Representation reasoning, Annual Reviews in Computer Science 2 (1987) 147-186. engineering and category theory, \entation and Inductive Bias, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990. pp. 169-182. for boolean algebras, Trans. Amer. Math. Sot. 40 (I 936) 37-l 1 I. in: D.P. Benjamin (Ed.), Change of Repre- 