Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.   Ethics, Medicine and Public Health 25 (2022) 100856Available  online  atScienceDirectwww.sciencedirect.comHUMANITIES IN HEALTHHow  to  avoid  future  ‘‘Covid-19  origins’’questions?Z.  Su a,∗,  D.  McDonnell b,  A.  Cheshmehzangi c,d,J. Ahmad e,  S. ˇSegalo f,  C.P.  da  Veiga g,  Y.-T.  Xiang h,∗∗a School  of  Public  Health;  Institute  for  Human  Rights,  Southeast  University,  210009  Nanjing,Chinab Department  of  Humanities,  South  East  Technological  University,  R93  V960,  Irelandc Faculty  of  Science  and  Engineering,  University  of  Nottingham  Ningbo  China,  315100  Ningbo,Zhejiang,  Chinad Network  for  Education  and  Research  on  Peace  and  Sustainability,  Hiroshima  University,739-8530 Hiroshima,  Japane Rufaidah  Nursing  College,  Peshawar,  Pakistanf Faculty  of  Health  Studies,  University  of  Sarajevo,  71000  Sarajevo,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovinag Fundac¸ão  Dom  Cabral  -  FDC,  Av.  Princesa  Diana,  760,  Alphaville,  Lagoa  dos  Ingleses,34018-006  Nova  Lima,  MG,  Brazilh Unit  of  Psychiatry,  Department  of  Public  Health  and  Medicinal  Administration,  University  ofMacau, Macao  SAR,  ChinaReceived  8  November  2022;  accepted  9  November  2022Available  online  16  November  2022KEYWORDSCovid-19;Disease  surveillance;Infectious  disease;Public  healthSummary  Origins  debates  regarding  Covid-19  are  gaining  momentum  again.  In  light  of  thecontinued infections  and  deaths  of  Covid-19  seen  in  countries  rich  and  poor,  rather  than  focusingthe approach  with  ‘‘whodunit’’,  developing  solutions  that  can  help  societies  become  betterprepared for  future  pandemics  might  be  a  more  meaningful  way  to  move  forward.  In  this  paper,we propose  a  solution  that  could  help  society  better  predict  and  prevent  future  pandemics.A system  could  allow  humans  to  anonymously  report  potential  infectious  disease  outbreakswithout fearing  backlash  or  prejudice  and  could  automatically  surveil  for  potential  diseasetransfers  or  virus  leaks.  The  proposed  autonomous  and  anonymous  pandemic  reporting  andAbbreviations: AI, artificial intelligence.∗ Corresponding author at: School of Public Health; Institute for Human Rights, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China.∗∗ Co-Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: suzhaohuiszh@yeah.net, szh@seu.edu.cn.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jemep.2022.1008562352-5525/© 2022 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.Z.  Su,  D.  McDonnell,  A.  Cheshmehzangi  et  al.surveillance  system  has  the  potential  to  help  health  officials  locate  infectious  disease  outbreaksbefore they  form  into  pandemics.  And  in  turn,  it  better  prevents  future  pandemics  and  avoidsCovid-19  origins  debates.© 2022  Elsevier  Masson  SAS.  All  rights  reserved.The  ‘‘whodunit’’  question  about  Covid-19  origins  continuesto  ferment  [1].  On  October  13th,  2021,  the  World  HealthOrganization  has  formed  its  second  team  to  investigate  theCovid-19  origins  [1].  It  is  important  to  note  that  October,2021  is  when  affluent  countries  like  the  United  States  stillhave  an  average  of  approximately  10,000  new  Covid-19  casesdaily  [2].  In  a  time  when  low  to  middle-income  countries,from  Yemen  (0.2%)  to  Uganda  (0.9%),  by  mid-October  of  thisyear,  many  countries  worldwide  have  less  than  1%  of  theirpopulation  vaccinated  [3].  While  truth  matters,  in  light  ofthe  sobering  statistics  about  Covid-19  and  the  importance  ofmedical  resources  amid  the  pandemic  [4],  it  is  worth  asking:Can  Covid-19  origins  investigations  offer  more  answers  thanquestions?  (Fig.  1)  What  about  questions  addressing  the  topicof  ‘‘How  to  avoid  future  Covid-19  origins’’  investigations?Overall,  three  considerations  are  at  the  center  stage  ofthe  Covid-19  origins  discussions:  (1)  whether  the  virus  wastransferred  from  wild  animals  to  humans,  (2)  whether  thevirus  was  leaked  from  a  lab  intentionally  or  accidentally,  and(3)  whether  particular  Chinese  government  or  health  officeshindered  the  disease  identification  or  prevention  process.While  these  questions  are  thought-provoking  and  emotional-stimulating,  it  is  essential  to  note  that  answering  them  canoffer  limited  help  to  strengthen  the  ability  of  societies  toprevent  future  pandemics.  Essentially,  regardless  of  howthe  Covid-19  origins  debates  unfold,  the  known  facts  aboutthe  pandemic  are  hardly  refutable:  it  is  close  to  impossible(1)  to  avoid  human-animal  contact,  (2)  to  eradicate  humanerrors,  and  (3)  to  annihilate  human  malice  or  self-interest.In  other  words,  zoonotic  infectious  diseases  are  inevitable,and  what  is  also  inevitable  are  intentional  or  unintentionalhuman  flaws  that  might  further  worsen  disease  outbreaks.Infectious  diseases,  especially  those  zoonotic  in  nature,could  become  more  prevalent  if  unchecked  human  activ-ities  continue,  such  as  enlisting  animal  habitats  for  foodproduction  [5].  With  the  Black  Death  occurring  in  Italy,  HIVfamed  throughout  cities  across  America,  and  the  1918—1919influenza  pandemic  attributed  to  Spain  [6],  without  ade-quate  disease  surveillance  systems  in  place,  countries  maybe  forced  to  answer  future  infectious  diseases  origins  ques-tions  and  fend  from  blame  and  backlash  [7,8].  Infectiousdiseases  are  unavoidable,  especially  those  that  are  zoonoticin  nature  [9].  However,  what  can  be  controlled is  howswiftly  and  effectively  societies  can  accurately identifyoutbreaks  before  they  form into  pandemics  [10].  Oneway  for  the  world  to  better  avert  future  pandemics  is  bydeveloping  a  pandemic  surveillance  system  that  can  bypassthe  need  to  solve  impossible  problems  such  as  preventinghumans  from  contacting  wild  animals  or  eradicating  humanvices  or  errors  for  good.One  noticeable  potential  of  this  system  is  that  it  couldhelp  societies  detect,  identify,  and  control  infectious  dis-ease  flare-ups  and  outbreaks  in  their  infancy  (Fig.  2).  Thereare  two  possible  approaches  to  achieve  this  objective:  (1)anonymous  human  reports  on  potential  infectious  diseasecases  and  (2)  autonomous  technology-based  surveillancesystems  to  monitor  disease  outbreaks,  vetted  by  rigorousreviews  conducted  by  epidemiologists  anonymously.  Withadvanced  technological  solutions,  such  as  smart  sensors  andgeneral  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  equipped  with  powerfuldata  analytics  and  computing  capabilities,  technologists  andepidemiologists  could  identify  potential  infectious  diseaseoutbreaks  via  genomic  surveillance,  real-time  monitoring  ofsewage  and  air  for  potential  virus  clusters,  and  analyzingsocial  media  content  for  similar  disease  patterns  faster  andmore  accurate  [11].Anonymous  human  input  is  the  other  crucial  componentof  the  system.  In  addition  to  autonomous  infectious  dis-ease  outbreaks  detected  by  functions  such  as  AI-poweredmachine  vision  and  natural  language  processing,  the  heavytechnology  integration  can  also  anonymously  allow  activeand  proactive  human  inputs  of  potential  disease  outbreaks.The  anonymity  assured  by  the  system,  both  at  the  individualreporting,  system  analyzing,  and  epidemiologists  review-ing  levels,  could  be  crucial  to  persuade  communities  fromall  walks  of  life  (e.g.,  ordinary  farmers,  early-career  doc-tors,  and  famed  scientists)  to  participate  in  the  pandemicsurveillance  process  without  fearing  for  backlash  or  bully-ing.  Anonymity  should  be  ensured  at  the  entire  reportingmechanism,  vetted  technologists  and  epidemiologists  shouldbe  selected  on  a  rotating  basis  so  that  no  one  wouldknow  the  true  identity  of  the  pandemic  ‘‘reporters’’  or‘‘reviewers’’,  effectively  making  sure  these  ‘‘pandemicguardians’’  would  not  be:  (1)  embarrassed  by  potential  falsepositives,  (2)  retaliated  by  reporting  true  positives  (e.g.,actual  pandemic-prone  infectious  disease  outbreaks),  and(3)  discriminated  against  or  bullied  by  their  family,  friends,colleagues,  or  strangers.Further  ensuring  and  protecting  anonymity,  the  systemcould  operate  as  an  independent  organization  that  directlyreports  to  the  head  of  the  government,  presumably  theleast  likely  person  who  wishes  to  see  a  pandemic  ram-page  a  nation,  effectively  making  the  system  more  resistantto  human  errors  and  malice.  This  setting  could  also  offera  much-needed  layer  of  authority  and  assurance  to  safe-guard  further  the  ability  to  make  evidence-based  public2Ethics,  Medicine  and  Public  Health  25  (2022)  100856Figure 1. Questions the Covid-19 investigations cannot answer.health  conclusions  and  decisions.  By  building  the  diseasesurveillance  ecosystem  with  stringently  guarded  reportingand  reviewing  systems,  advanced  surveillance  and  analyticaltools,  and  state-of-the-art  privacy  and  security  measures,the  established  system  could  serve  as  a  pandemic  watch-dog  body  above  ideological  differences,  financial  interests,and  political  turnovers. independence  mightalso  give  its  power  to  maintain  and  sustain  its  (1)  trans-parency  associated  with  the  autonomous  technology-baseddisease  surveillance  branch,  (2)  secrecy  associated  with  theanonymous  public-led  and  epidemiologists-vetted  diseasereporting  branch,  and  (3)  authority  as  the  evidence-basedinfectious  disease  monitoring  organization.Its  strong We  named  the  proposed  system  the  Anonymous  andAutonomous  Pandemic  Surveillance  System (2AP2S).  Atechnological  system  could  be  a  meaningful  and  fruitfulcontribution  to  the  current  and  future  pandemics,  it  hasthe  potential  to  not  only  inspire  current  pandemic  inter-ventions  to  make  them  more  solution-focused  but  also  cannullify  the  need  for  future  ‘‘Covid-19  origins’’  debates  orprobes.  Acknowledging  and  addressing  the  inevitability  ofinfectious  disease  outbreaks,  2AP2S  has  the  potential  tohelp  societies  capture  pandemic-prone  outbreaks  faster,with  greater  precision  and  efficiency,  and  without  incurringfutile  conflicts  that  could  harm  global  solidarity  for  the  longrun.3Z.  Su,  D.  McDonnell,  A.  Cheshmehzangi  et  al.Figure 2. The Anonymous and Autonomous Pandemic Surveillance System (2AP2S).Ethics approval and consent to participateDisclosure of interestNot  applicable.The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  competing  interest.Consent for publicationReferencesNot  applicable.Availability of data and materialsData  are  available  upon  reasonable  request.FundingNone.Authors’ contributionsZS  conceived  the  work,  reviewed  the  literature,  drafted,and  edited  the  manuscript.  DMD,  AC,  JA,  SS,  CPDV,  &  YTXreviewed  the  literature  and  edited  the  manuscript.AcknowledgementsThe  authors  wish  to  express  their  gratitude  to  the  editor  andthe  reviewers  for  their  insightful  feedback  and  constructiveinput.[1] World Health Organization. WHO announces proposedits Scientific Advisory Group for the Origins(SAGO). World Health Organization.members of of novel pathogens https://www.who.int/news/item/13-10-2021-who-announces-proposed-members-of-its-scientific-advisory-group-for-the-origins-of-novel-pathogens-(sago). 2021. Accessed October 15, 2021.Published[2] Our World in Data. Coronavirus pandemic (Covid-19). OxfordUniversity. https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus. Published2021. Accessed November 2, 2021.[3] Our World in Data. Coronavirus (Covid-19) vaccinations. Oxfordhttps://ourworldindata.org/Covid-vaccinations.University. Published 2021. Accessed October 15, 2021.[4] Johns Hopkins University. Mortality analyses. Johns HopkinsUniversity. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/data/mortality. Pub-lished 2021. Accessed October 29, 2021.[5] Rohr JR, Barrett CB, Civitello DJ, Craft ME, Delius B, DeLeoGA, et al. Emerging human infectious diseases and the links toglobal food production. Nat Sustain 2019;2:445—56.[6] Piret J, Boivin G. Pandemics throughout history. Front Microbiol2021;11:631736.[7] Su Z, McDonnell D, Ahmad J, Cheshmehzangi A, Li X, Meyer K,et al. Time to stop the use of ‘‘Wuhan virus’’, ‘‘China virus’or ‘‘Chinese virus’’ across the scientific community. BMJ GlobHealth 2020;5:e003746.[8] White AIR. Historical linkages: epidemic threat, economic risk,and xenophobia. Lancet 2020;395:1250—1.4Ethics,  Medicine  and  Public  Health  25  (2022)  100856[9] Mallapaty S. The search for animals harbouring coronavirus -and why it matters. Nature 2021;591:26—8.[10] McCloskey B, Dar O, Zumla A, Heymann DL. Emerging infectiousdiseases and pandemic potential: status quo and reducing riskof global spread. Lancet Infect Dis 2014;14:1001—10.[11] Su Z, McDonnell D, Bentley BL, He J, Shi F, CheshmehzangiA, et al. Addressing Biodisaster X threats with artificial intel-ligence and 6G technologies: Literature review and criticalinsights. J Med Internet Res 2021;23:e26109.5