Fagerholm, Fabian; De los Ríos, Andres; Cárdenas Castro, Carol; Gil, Jenny; Chatzigeorgiou,Alexander; Ampatzoglou, Apostolos; Becker, ChristophIt’s about time: How to study intertemporal choice in systems designPublished in:Information and Software TechnologyDOI:10.1016/j.infsof.2023.107163Published: 01/06/2023Document VersionPublisher's PDF, also known as Version of recordPublished under the following license:CC BYPlease cite the original version:Fagerholm, F., De los Ríos, A., Cárdenas Castro, C., Gil, J., Chatzigeorgiou, A., Ampatzoglou, A., & Becker, C.(2023). It’s about time: How to study intertemporal choice in systems design. Information and SoftwareTechnology, 158, [107163]. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2023.107163This is an electronic reprint of the original article.This reprint may differ from the original in pagination and typographic detail.Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)This material is protected by copyright and other intellectual property rights, andduplication or sale of all or part of any of the repository collections is not permitted, except that material maybe duplicated by you for your research use or educational purposes in electronic or print form. You mustobtain permission for any other use. Electronic or print copies may not be offered, whether for sale orotherwise to anyone who is not an authorised user.Contents lists available at ScienceDirectInformation and Software Technologyjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/infsofIt’s about time: How to study intertemporal choice in systems designFabian Fagerholm a,∗, Andres De los Ríos b, Carol Cárdenas Castro c, Jenny Gil c,Alexander Chatzigeorgiou d, Apostolos Ampatzoglou d, Christoph Becker b,∗a Aalto University, Finlandb University of Toronto, Canadac S4N, Colombiad University of Macedonia, GreeceA R T I C L E I N F OA B S T R A C TDataset link: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7646337Keywords:Intertemporal choiceTemporal discountingJudgement and decision makingNaturalistic decision makingCognitive task analysisPsychologyHuman factorsContext: Decision making pervades software and systems engineering. Intertemporal decisions involve trade-offs among outcomes at different points in time. They play a central role in systems design, as recognisedsince the inception of the software engineering (SE) field. They are also crucial for the sustainability of designdecisions. However, temporal decision making is not adequately understood in SE. The field of Judgement andDecision Making (JDM) offers important empirical findings and research methods that could be utilised.Objective: This article establishes a baseline for studying how software professionals handle intertemporalchoices. It examines how temporal distance affects choices in an example scenario, explores in what areasof software development such decisions can be found, and examines how systems design decisions can becharacterised and studied as intertemporal.Method: We developed a method to study intertemporal choice in SE, based on an initial set of psychologicaltheory grounded in JDM. We instantiated the method in a study to elicit responses to an intertemporal choicetask followed by a Cognitive Task Analysis (CTA) interview.Results: We found that study participants overall tended to discount future outcomes, but individual partici-pants varied wildly in how they valued present vs. future outcomes. They indicated several locations in whichintertemporal choices occur in everyday software development. Based on these findings, and by reconcilingour initial theory with existing JDM theory and results, we further developed and refined our theory and studymethod into a framework for studying intertemporal decision making in SE.Conclusions: To obtain a basis for more sustainable software systems design decisions, SE research shouldadopt a more comprehensive, detailed, and empirically consistent way of understanding and studyingintertemporal choices. We provide suggestions for how future research could achieve practical methods thataddress essential characteristics of real-life systems design decisions.1. IntroductionThe life of a software system is full of trade-off decisions. Re-quirements engineers, architects, programmers, testers, user interfacedesigners, project managers, and many other software experts mustwork in concert to navigate design options on different levels that shapethe system they are making. In response to this reality, software engi-neering research and practice have developed sophisticated approachesto support and, in a limited sense, automate decision-making withinspecific areas of the profession.Many trade-off decisions in systems design involve a dimension ofcentral importance that is particularly difficult to grasp: time. Theiroutcomes are scattered in time: some of them are close, others distant.Decision making researchers call such trade-offs intertemporal [1]. De-signers must judge not only what options exist, but also when they occurand who they affect. Long-term considerations have been discussed∗ Corresponding authors.E-mail addresses:fabian.fagerholm@aalto.fi (F. Fagerholm), andres.dlr94@gmail.com (A. De los Ríos), carolcardenasc@gmail.com (C. Cárdenas Castro),gil.j.jenny@gmail.com (J. Gil), achat@uom.edu.gr (A. Chatzigeorgiou), a.ampatzoglou@uom.edu.gr (A. Ampatzoglou), christoph.becker@utoronto.ca(C. Becker).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2023.107163Received 5 August 2022; Received in revised form 24 December 2022; Accepted 29 January 2023InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)107163Availableonline3February20230950-5849/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).F. Fagerholm et al.since the coining of the term ‘‘software engineering’’ (SE) and were partof the founding impetus of the field. They become increasingly urgentas a consequence of the ongoing trend of digitisation of society.The intertemporal nature of SE choices may affect what is chosen inundesirable ways. A tendency to favour immediate outcomes over moredistant ones may lead to favouring quick wins over options that lookless attractive but are more sustainable. This has internal and externalconsequences for a software project. Internally, the deterioration ofa design causes increased effort for future development and quality.Externally, consequences include negative effects for customers andsociety at large, depending on the kind of system being built.In this paper, we explore the issue of complex software systemsdesign decisions with implications over time through the psychologicallens of intertemporal choice: ‘decisions involving trade-offs among costsand benefits occurring at different times’ [1, p. 351]. We discuss the na-ture of such decisions and introduce concepts from scientific disciplinesthat have examined these topics since before SE emerged. To addressthe temporal dimension of decisions more wisely, we propose to firstunderstand more about the decisions themselves as well as the complexcognitive and social decision-making processes that unfold when real-life systems design and development happens. Humans can, after all,successfully navigate very complex design spaces involving technical,social, temporal, and ethical dimensions. Knowing more about how thathappens, and when and why the process might break down, will becrucial for the creation of novel approaches to decision-making in SE.We examine how time plays a role in design decisions in softwareprojects, and we propose a characterisation of intertemporal choicesthat helps us understand and analyse their cognitive and social aspects.We conclude by mapping possible research directions that we may pur-sue to increase the understanding of intertemporal choice in softwaredesign decision-making across time. The direction taken here extendsthe existing significant research in SE on human factors (see, e.g., [2–5]for overviews of different areas) and opens a new direction of researchwith novel potential for making information and software technologymore sustainable.2. Background2.1. Decision-making across time in software engineeringComplex engineering decisions with many variables and parametersare at the heart of SE as a field. For example, this includes architecturaltrade-off decisions [6–11], Technical Debt management [12–15], andsoftware component selection [16,17].Intertemporal choices in which the outcomes are located at differentfuture points occur in many areas of life. Pinpointing where they occurin systems design is not straightforward, but many decisions taken insystem development have uncertain but far-reaching long-term effects.Many also involve trade-offs between uncertain longer-term effectsand shorter-term effects. In SE, the decisions that are most explicitlyintertemporal surface in Technical Debt management [12–15], archi-tectural trade-offs [6–11], refactoring [18], software maintenance andsustainability [19], as well as in test automation, feature prioritisa-tion, and project management decisions, as we established previouslythrough a pair of systematic literature reviews [20–22]. These kindsof decisions all deal specifically with options that have outcomes atdifferent points in the future. However, there may be other places toowhere intertemporal choices surface in less obvious ways.Building on predecessor disciplines, SE methods rely on multi-criteria decision making methods including utility analysis and the[23,24]. These mechanisms are used toAnalytic Hierarchy Processeffectively handle the uncertainty and complexity that arises from theinterplay of many intersecting factors. Attention is now honing in onthe cognitive aspect of decision making in such situations [6]. While theexisting work on decision making in SE and its predecessor disciplinesbring many valuable suggestions on how to effectively and efficientlycompute a decision given complex parameters and probabilities, werecognise that the question ‘how do human beings make such decisions’falls first and foremost into the purview of psychology and the socialsciences. Similar to other human factors research in SE [3,25], wetherefore build first from a rigorous foundation based on referencedisciplines such as psychology. These provide us with a vocabulary forbeing precise about the questions we ask.2.2. The concept of intertemporal choice in reference disciplinesThe reference discipline for decision making is of course the fieldof Judgement and Decision Making [26], which employs perspectivesranging from psychology and social psychology to behavioural eco-nomics, sociology, neuroscience and combinations thereof, such asneuroeconomics [27]. JDM typically locates its roots in Bernoulli’swork that founded multi-criteria decision making but has incorporateda broad range of disciplinary views over the decades [28].In SE and other fields, the terms choice and decision are sometimesused interchangeably. But it is worth paying attention to the nuanceswith which reference disciplines differentiate between these key terms.• A decision arises in a situation in which someone could conceiv-ably make different commitments on how to proceed. In natural-istic decision making, a decision is defined as ‘‘committing oneselfto a certain course of action’’ [29]. We follow many JDM re-searchers in taking the encompassing perspective that a decisionis a ‘‘conclusion or resolution reached after consideration’’ [30].• A choice is a specific type of decision where distinct options existfrom which a selection has to be made. In other words, a choiceis the ‘‘act of selecting or making a decision when faced with twoor more possibilities’’[31].• Judgement is broader. For example, when a person faced with achoice between two options rejects the framing and generates athird option to pursue, they have exercised judgement in reflect-ing on the boundaries of the presented decision and have madea different decision (commitment). In other words, judgement is‘‘the ability to make considered decisions or come to sensibleconclusions’’ [32].It is important to note that these distinctions, while established inthe reference disciplines of JDM, are not standard in SE. Instead, theprevailing view is narrower, based on only some areas that investigatedecision making from a certain perspective. In Decision Analysis andMulti Criteria Decision Making, a narrow definition of decision makingas choice – as ‘‘selecting one option among possible alternatives’’ –has been so dominant over the broader cognitive, psychological andsocial reality of decision making that the concept of decision makingcollapses into choice. As a consequence, some have questioned whetherthis concept is in fact relevant in software development – for example,whether programmers really make explicit ‘choices’ [33]. In reality,however, decisions often involve the creative development of newoptions and the re-examination of what comprises the situation. At thesame time, they often do not involve choices between options [34]. Thismay appear counter-intuitive, but a commitment to action can be made,and often is made, without comparing multiple options.Correspondingly, this article takes the encompassing definition ofdecision making from the JDM literature and uses the terms as definedabove. However, we use the term choice to mean decision in onecase: decisions that involve trade-offs between outcomes occurring atdifferent points in the future. These are called intertemporal choices [1,35], and constitute a central topic in JDM. The term intertemporaldecision would perhaps be more accurate, but since the term is alreadyestablished, we make this exception to be consistent with terminologyin JDM and behavioural economics. Still, we speak of intertemporaldecision making when referring to the activity of making decisions ofan intertemporal nature.InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)1071632F. Fagerholm et al.Intertemporal choices are often studied in terms of the extent towhich time changes the subjective valuation of an outcome. The degreeto which an increase in time changes the valuation a decision makerplaces on an outcome is called temporal discounting. For example, aperson who is indifferent between receiving $100 in one year andreceiving $100 in two years would be said to exhibit no discounting,whereas someone who would require an additional $100 to be indif-ferent to postponing the receipt of money by a year would be said tohave a discount rate of 100% for that year. Researchers investigatingintertemporal choice have noted that ‘‘most – if not all – choices thatindividuals and organisations make in the real world are intertempo-ral’’ [36]. It follows that many, if not most, software design choices are,too. SE decisions that are most explicitly intertemporal include Tech-nical Debt management, architectural trade-offs, refactoring decisions,test automation, feature prioritisation, and many project managementdecisions [20,22].A wealth of research exists on intertemporal choice [35], but withinthe context of SE, it is a new concept [21]. Most theories, methodsand studies are based on the idea that discounting exists and that itcan be expressed as a mathematical model of valuation as a functionof the time horizon. For example, the dominant model of discountedutility proposed by Samuelson [37] assumes that the discount rate isconstant in time and models the future value 𝐹 𝑉 as a function of theearlier (often present) value 𝑃 𝑉 and the time between the two options𝑡. In the case of discounted utility, the simplest model, the annualisedcontinuously compounded discount rate 𝐷𝑅𝑐 [37] is constant: 𝐹 𝑉 =𝑃 𝑉 × 𝑒𝐷𝑅𝑐 ×𝑡. Because many studies observed that participants’ choicesare not well described by this exponential curve [1], other models havebeen developed and evaluated [1,38,39]. For example, in hyperbolicdiscounting, the discount rate decreases over time, with the rate ofdecrease in turn decreasing over time [40]; and the Area Under theCurve (AUC) provides a compound measure of the aggregate amountof discounting observed in an individual or a sample over the entirerange of time periods [41].Real-life intertemporal choices can be explicit and salient in thedecision-maker’s mind, such as the choice of whether to buy a specifichealth insurance; vague and open-ended, such as the decision of how tospend the weekend; or habitual, such as always buying a doughnut withthe morning coffee on the way to work. It is usually not straightforwardto tell what the best decision would be, and with varying individualcharacteristics, different persons will choose differently. Nevertheless,a general tendency is for humans to favour positive outcomes thatare more immediate, as indicated by positive discount rates acrossexperiments in many fields [1].Decisions do not happen in a vacuum. They are affected by theconfiguration of choices [42,43] and the context in which decisionsare made. The larger context of decision making includes such aspectsas team roles and group dynamics as well as organisational policies,incentives, norms, and values. In JDM, the entire system of these ele-ments is referred to as the ‘macro-cognitive’ system of decision making(c.f. [44,45]).In summary, decades of intertemporal choice research in these ref-erence disciplines have resulted in sophisticated study designs to elicitdiscount rates [46] and explore the many cognitive factors involved inpreference construction and choice. Researchers have elaborated andcompared several models to represent discounting behaviour over time;identified a ‘‘spectacular’’ range of individual behaviours in differentstudies [1]; explored questions such as the differential discounting oflosses, gains, and ‘mixed outcomes’ that combine losses and gains [36];and questioned whether the standard model of intertemporal choicebased on quantitative discount rates over time is an empirically validdescription of how the human mind perceives and values time [47].These frameworks and methods provide a rigorous foundation for thestudy of intertemporal choice in systems design.2.3. Intertemporal choice in SEWhen we consider SE decisions as intertemporal choices, many ques-tions arise. From this perspective, how software professionals actuallymake intertemporal design decisions is not at all clear: The questionhas only recently begun to attract attention in SE [6,20,21,48,49].Excessive temporal discounting can cause significant long-termharm, so understanding discounting in software development mayprovide a key to better long-term outcomes. Long-term perspectiveshave often been advocated for [9,50,51]. For example, the focus oftechnical debt on ‘expediency’ [52] already emphasises the costs ofshort-term thinking. Even more importantly, short-term thinking canlead to harmful outcomes for stakeholders and society at large.In a recent study [53], replicated in several countries [22], weexamined whether software developers discount future outcomes. Wefound extensive temporal discounting: To regard a positive uncertainfuture outcome (effort savings) as equally valuable as a comparablecloser outcome, participants in all cohorts required additional bene-fits that exceeded the effects of financial interest rates by orders ofmagnitude. But just as interestingly, the study also identified strikingdifferences in individual preferences and found that developers withmore breadth of experience discounted less.3. Methods and contributions3.1. Research questionsOur objective is to better understand the social and psychologicaldynamics at play in intertemporal software design decisions. We ask:how can we study intertemporal choices in systems design? We addressthis via three empirical questions and a method question.RQ1: How does temporal distance affect software professionals’choices?RQ2: Where do intertemporal choices occur in systems design prac-tice?RQ3: What are the salient features of intertemporal choices in systemsdesign practice?RQ4: How can we characterise intertemporal choices in systems de-sign?To address the three empirical questions, we present a method forstudying the behavioural and psychological aspects of what choicespeople make and how, and we instantiate it in an empirical study.Our method poses an intertemporal choice task in a familiar and often-occurring software project management task: that of choosing betweenwork with benefit in the short term and long term. This allows us toexamine RQ1. The method then uses this task as a probe for inquiringwhere and how intertemporal choices surface in our participants’ work.This allows us to look for other activities where intertemporal choicesoccur (RQ2) and elucidate their salient features (RQ3). Building onthis analysis of the study results, we then abstract our findings intoa framework for guiding future studies on intertemporal choice insystems design, addressing RQ4.This section covers the design of the method. Section 4 covers thestudy design using that method. Section 5 presents empirical resultsfrom that study, while Section 6 develops the overall framework forstudying intertemporal choices. The materials used in the method areopenly available [54].3.2. Method: Cognitive task analysisTo examine how software professionals make judgements and deci-sions that involve trade-offs in time between uncertain future outcomes,our method is structured around an intertemporal choice task thatperforms two roles:InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)1071633F. Fagerholm et al.1. It elicits an intertemporal choice response from each participant.2. It serves as a probe for a subsequent interview that explores whatother intertemporal choices the participants face in their dailywork and how they reason about them.4. Research design and analysis4.1. CTA study designThe method is designed to support researchers in exploring therange of reasoning mechanisms and heuristics in their participants’‘cognitive toolbox’ [55]. For this reason, it is based on Cognitive TaskAnalysis (CTA).CTA studies cognition in a real-world context [56] and has beenapplied in countless domains involving skilled expert performance,including medicine, emergency response teams, management, the mil-itary, and engineering [56–58]. It has come to describe a wide rangeof techniques for knowledge elicitation, data analysis, and knowledge rep-resentation, including incident-focused interview techniques such as thecritical decision method [59]. In SE, CTA techniques such as verbal pro-tocol analysis [60] have been used to gain insights into how cognitivebiases may impact the performance of software professionals [61].3.3. Task design for intertemporal choice studiesTo construct a study design for intertemporal decision making thatallows us to evaluate how temporal distance affects preferences andchoices, we turn again to the reference disciplines that have empiricallystudied intertemporal choice for decades [1]. A central issue is howto design the task that is used to prompt participants to make anintertemporal choice.Many task designs have been proposed to uncover and quantify tem-poral discounting. Most present a specific, abbreviated situation andelicit a response from participants. That response is used to construct arepresentation of their time preferences and establish if, and how much,they discount over time [1].We adopted the task design from our previous studies to examinewhether software developers discount future outcomes in a projectmanagement scenario. In this matching task [47,62], we ask participantsto indicate the time savings they would require to regard an uncer-tain positive outcome at different times in the future (potential effortsavings) as equally valuable as a comparable closer outcome (featuredevelopment). By asking participants to identify the threshold pointsat which the more distant outcomes are equal to the closer outcome,we can establish quantitative measures of the effect of time on theirpreferences.The task design consists of two stages. First, a decision-making sce-nario is presented, after which participants see two options: (1) spendeffort earlier on implementing a planned feature (a short-term option);or (2) spend effort to integrate a software library with potential long-term benefit in terms of reduced maintenance effort. The participants’task is to specify how many days of effort savings they would requireto prefer the second, long-term option over the first, short-term option.Following best practice in JDM, the uncertainty of the outcome is fixedat 60% probability to minimise additional discounting due to a lackof precise information on the degree of uncertainty [1]. The responseis used to establish a baseline preference (present value, PV) free ofpriming from the consideration of different time-frames. Second, thescenario is presented again with several different project time horizons,as shown in Fig. 1. The baseline answer from step 1 is used as the presentvalue to be compared against the other values to assess discounting. Asa result, participants are actively asked to consider what difference timemakes for their preference.The outcome of such a task is a series of data points that can beused to plot the effect of temporal distance on participants’ prefer-ences, compute discount rates if desired, and measure in more generalterms the temporal attitude of decision makers [46], as we previouslydemonstrated [22,53] and will present in Section 5. When this taskgets incorporated into a CTA study, however, it becomes the object ofcontinuous observation and the critical incident that can be studied andexamined.In CTA studies of intertemporal choice in SE, the task describedabove serves as a probe – the ‘critical incident’ used for subsequentintrospection and reflection. We rely on a probe because the conceptualframing of decisions as intertemporal is not common in practice (yet).To instantiate this method in a study, we embed the task intothe CTA study protocol. Whereas participants in the original studyanswered an online survey on their own, we now had participantsanswer the survey on paper with researchers present to observe themand collect data on how they reasoned. We altered the time horizonsto correspond more closely with project durations that the participantscould encounter in their work. The study can be understood as anoperational, changed-protocol, changed-operationalisations, changed-populations, and changed-experimenters replication [63] with the ad-dition of a qualitative framing.Extensive guidance on how incident-focused interviews should bedesigned, conducted, and analysed has been collected [56,57] andinforms our research design. Each session started with an introduc-tion and verification of informed consent, followed by the participantreceiving a paper questionnaire with a set of decision-making tasks(explained in the following section). The participant was asked to thinkaloud while reading and answering the questionnaire tasks. Once thetasks were completed, the researchers asked questions to gain moreinformation about how the participant had reached the task answers.The sessions were recorded for later analysis, and throughout the ses-sions, the researchers took notes of their observations. Each session hadone or two researchers present; guiding and note-taking were sharedin some sessions. Each session was roughly one hour in length. At theend, participants filled in background information on themselves. Inthis paper, we utilise data from the post-task interview.We conducted a series of pilots to (1) test and revise the task designand surrounding protocol and data collection mechanisms, (2) refinethe protocol guidance and instructions, and (3) allow all interviewersto become familiar with the process and practice interviewing. Thefirst pilot, conducted in English, led to discussions about simplifyingthe scenario and a change in interviewee instructions. Subsequently,we conducted pilots in Swedish, Greek and Spanish in parallel. TheSwedish pilots led to the introduction of a new variation of the surveyfor use in agile contexts where the participant is a product owner. TheSpanish and Greek pilots did not lead to further changes but served asinterviewer practice. Only the Swedish pilots were considered fit forinclusion in the final data set.4.2. Participants and implementationWe invited employees in three companies to participate in the study.Two of the companies remain anonymous in this paper.S4N (Company A) is a Colombian software development companywith offices in Bogotá, Medellín, and Seattle, USA, with more than250 employees and more than 150 software products deployed inindustries such as retail, airlines, insurance, and banking. In August2021, S4N was acquired by EPAM Systems, Inc. [64], a leading digitaltransformation services and product engineering company. The datacollection had been completed prior to the acquisition.Company B, based in Greece, is a leading European IT solutions andservices group with presence in multiple countries, employing morethan 2,000 professionals. The company develops products for banking,law and customs, security and taxation, transportation, telecommuni-cations, and healthcare sectors.Company C is a Swedish publicly traded provider of accounting,invoicing, sales support, and payroll administration for small- andmedium-sized companies. It has over 270 000 customers in Sweden andclose to 300 employees.InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)1071634F. Fagerholm et al.Fig. 1. Intertemporal choice scenario and decision tasks (excerpt from study protocol; version with work consequences for the participant themselves or their team).All data collection sessions were conducted on site in closed, quietrooms by researchers fluent in the participants’ native languages (Span-ish, Greek, and Swedish, respectively). The participants volunteeredand were not offered incentives or rewards.51 participants from the three companies (A: 20, B: 8, and C: 23)provided data for the study. There were 17 (33%) female and 32 (63%)male respondents; 2 (4%) did not provide gender information. Theparticipants were between 21 and 47 years old (MD: 31, SD: 7.05).During data cleaning, we identified one missing interview and onemissing set of quantitative responses from two separate participants;the total number of interviews and quantitative responses were thusboth 50.4.3. Data analysisThe range of collected data include 30–90 min of recordings perparticipant, the quantitative responses to the questionnaire, interviewtranscripts, and the interviewers’ observations and notes from thesession. We examined the quantitative data to yield a categorisation ofparticipant behaviour according to high-level patterns. The qualitativedata, and second-order notes taken while analysing the session notesand transcripts, were further analysed to locate examples of situationswith similarly temporal decisions that they were reminded of. Wecombined the individual findings to yield a higher-order descriptiveframework of intertemporal choice.4.3.1. Quantitative analysis of responsesFor the quantitative analysis, we examined the choice task anddemographic data using statistical methods to obtain measures forthe amount of discounting among the participants. We calculate anempirical function as the ratio between future response and presentresponse per time horizon. We calculate the overall discount rate usingthe area under the curve for the empirical function, as done in ourprevious work [22,65]. Because we allowed participants to specify thatthey would always choose a future option for all time horizons, ourtask data includes three answers with zero days for all time horizons. Inthe statistical calculations, we assumed that they were indifferent andconstant in their discounting (i.e., their empirical function was set to 1InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)1071635F. Fagerholm et al.for all time horizons to allow calculations with the empirical functionas divisor).For the measurement of temporal discounting, the exponentialmodel was considered because it is commonly used in the intertem-poral choice literature [39] but we chose AUC based on its theory-neutrality [41], a desirable characteristic in the absence of evidencefor model choice, its suitability for providing a comparable measure oftotal discounting for a participant, as well as its ease of calculation andreplication.We used descriptive statistics to examine the demographic dataand describe the sample. We used box plots to gain an overview ofthe distribution of the time-savings required by participants to choosethe long-term option. We plotted the median discount rate against thetime horizon options to examine the overall tendency. We also plottedindividual discount rates against the time horizon to examine indi-vidual differences. All analysis code is included in the supplementarymaterials.4.3.2. Qualitative analysis of interviewsThe qualitative component of analysis consists of several relatedaspects. We do not use the task recordings in this paper but focus onthe interviews.The interviews were recorded, transcribed by native speakers onthe author team, and coded. For language reasons, coding was splitwith partial overlaps across the team, maximising how we deployed ourlanguage competences. That means that the analysis was done on theoriginals for the Spanish and Swedish, and on translated transcripts forthe Greek interviews. Spanish interviews were coded by one author andreviewed by the two senior authors fluent in Spanish. In this iterativeprocess, we discussed and refined the coding in detail until consensuswas reached. Greek interviews were then translated to English andcoded by the same two authors; Swedish interviews were coded last,by one senior author. All quotes were manually translated by a nativespeaker of the origin language.In the interviews, we asked our interviewees explicitly for situationsof similar kind to our task to address RQ2. Carefully staying away fromoverly specific and leading language, we stated our interest in identify-ing ‘‘scenarios where there is this kind of future outcome that has to beconsidered’’ and asked them ‘‘help us pin down some examples of thosekinds of situations’’. We coded all interviews to identify (a) ‘similarsituations’, broadly construed, (b) ‘intertemporal choice’ situations thatare explicitly about temporal trade-offs, and (c) whether, overall, ourinterviewee recognised intertemporal choice situations in their work.For a full tabulation, see supplementary materials.To identify where intertemporal choices occur in our participants’work (RQ2), we reviewed all these instances, and more broadly allinterviews as a whole. In our participant’s memories, similar to othercognitive interviews, a general recognition of semblance is often fol-lowed by some probing, which can trigger a sequence of related events,some more concrete than others. In our interviews we gain glimpsesinto stories and follow up on those that appear promising. We pick andreport on example instances because they represent situations that are1. explicitly intertemporal (i.e. the interviewee describes them ashaving outcomes occurring at different points in time),2. described in enough detail to narrate them as a vignette, and3. refer to concrete SE topics such as testing, project management,architecture, etc.The identified instances of intertemporal choices were organisedinto logical groups for the purpose of presenting them in Section 5.2.The chosen examples were selected not for their representative cov-erage or frequency, but for their value in explaining categories andillustrating salient aspects of how SE categories such as quality assuranceor technical debt bring forth intertemporality. The overall assessment,whether or not each interviewee recognises some intertemporal choicesituations in their work life, is a holistic judgement that considersall parts of the interview and their dynamic evolution. We do notprovide frequency counts for these examples because there is no fixedthreshold that defines at which point a participant’s memory of awork situation and its semblance to intertemporal choice turns into aconcrete experience.To characterise intertemporal choices in SE (RQ3), we used cuesfrom the structure of the examples to characterise the type of situationas intertemporal, generalising from situational features as well as priorliterature in SE, JDM, and intertemporal choice. For example, whenit comes to bug fixing, it is established that bugs are associated withseverity, cost, and ripple effects, and relevant management conceptsinclude cost estimation, risk management, prioritisation, milestones,and project schedules. Temporal dynamics become visible in how theseconcepts relate to each other in concrete instances. This iterative pro-cess of cycling between theory and data in interpretation is typical forthe analysis of qualitative cognitive interviews [66].5. Results from the studyIn this section, we first examine the occurrence of temporal dis-counting. We show that despite an aggregate trend to favour more im-mediate outcomes, our participants vary in interesting ways in whetherand how they discount future outcomes. We then identify examplesof real-life situations where intertemporal choices occur and organisethe examples into areas, providing an answer for how intertemporalchoices manifest in systems design.5.1. Temporal distance systematically affects the preferences of some butnot all software professionals (RQ1)We first examine the extent of temporal discounting among our par-ticipants. Fig. 2 shows their responses across different time horizons atwhich potential future effort savings could be obtained in our scenario(6 months, 1, 2, 3, and 5 years). For each time horizon, the participantswere asked to indicate how many days of effort savings it would takefor them to prefer the potential future savings over getting the nearerbenefit. The responses show striking variance and a clear upward trendacross time. The aggregate trend is similar to, but less pronounced thanin our previous studies [22,53], adding to the growing evidence baseof the extent of temporal discounting in SE.For the intertemporal analysis, the first response for six months wasused as the present value (PV) and normalised to 1, and the response foryears one and beyond were set to the ratio between PV and the futurevalue for each scenario. This allows us to calculate how a difference intemporal distance affects the participants’ responses. To understand thekinds of temporal discounting behaviour, consider the three responsepatterns shown in Fig. 3. For a participant indifferent to changes intime, the normalised ratio stays constant across time horizons. For aparticipant whose valuation changes with increased time, the curvedeviates from 1. A downward deviation indicates temporal discount-ing: they prefer options with nearer outcomes. An upward deviationindicates a preference for more distant outcomes.If we want to quantify the overall amount of discounting exhibitedper participant across all time horizons, we can measure the area underthe curve (AUC). In this case, with four curve segments, the AUCfor an indifferent participant will be 4. An AUC above 4 indicates afuture preference: the participant would, overall, prefer to wait for futurebenefits. An AUC below 4 indicates temporal discounting : the participantwould, overall, prefer nearer benefits. An AUC of four is the line oftemporal indifference.As our analysis shows, we observed extensive temporal discountingin about 40% of participants, but also striking differences in individualpreferences. About 40% of participants remained indifferent to changesin time, and over 20% exhibited a future-oriented perspective. Sowhile some software professionals exhibit temporal discounting, othersdo not. This distinction of three patterns suggests the existence ofInformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)1071636F. Fagerholm et al.Fig. 2. Results from our study on intertemporal choice in software projects, a replication of two previous studies [22,53]. The figures show the distribution of time savings (days)to prefer a long-term investment, for different project time horizons. The left figure (a) shows the wide variance in discounting. Outliers above 100 days are omitted from thezoomed figure on the right (b) to focus on the main effect.Fig. 3. Future preferences (𝑛 = 11), present preferences (𝑛 = 18), and indifference (𝑛 = 21) appear when examining normalised responses to a project-level intertemporal choicescenario, split into groups by overall individual discounting. The grey area represents a 95% confidence interval.systematic factors that influence temporal preference, which are worthinvestigating in the future.Fig. 4 plots AUC per company and shows some striking patterns.There is no participant with future preference in the Greek sample,while the Swedish sample exhibits a very large range (additional out-liers at 50 and 28 are omitted for visual clarity). While the limited dataand the complexity of the situation prevent us from deducing simplecausal factors to explain the comparisons across cohorts of this replica-tion, it is interesting to note that this replication varies from previouspopulations in dimensions of culture (our participants come from threecompanies and three countries, one in the global south) and roles (thisreplication involves professionals while a previous replication involvedstudents [22]). As in previous replications, no correlations were foundwith respect to age or other demographic variables. This highlightsthe importance of gaining a situated understanding of individual dif-ferences in preferences and reasoning. We will return to this issue inthe discussion.Fig. 4. Temporal preferences quantified by AUC per company. Two outliers above 20are omitted to highlight the main effect. The dotted red line represents indifferencebetween present and future outcomes.InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)1071637F. Fagerholm et al.5.2. Many situations in systems design involve intertemporal choices (RQ2)Do professionals think thattheir work contains intertemporalchoices? Yes, in the interviews, all but one of fifty study participantsreadily identified experiences they had encountered which resembledthe intertemporal nature of the scenario we presented. They providednumerous examples from a range of domains that illustrate how in-tertemporal choices surface in their work. Some examples remainedmore abstract or somewhat vague, while others led to detailed storiesand memories of recent incidents. Below, we review each identifieddomain and present a selection of examples that best illustrate howintertemporal choices manifest in our participants’ professional prac-tice. The purpose is not to exhaustively list all possible intertemporalchoices in systems design, nor to make claims about how frequent orsignificant they are, but rather to show where they occur and how wemight recognise them.5.2.1. Product development considers multiple time scalesMany examples referred to the strategic and operational choicesmade in product development, iteratively balancing competing de-mands and priorities that evolve on different timescales.Feature development and prioritisation are intertemporal choicesbecause they locate the realisation of various expressions of the organi-sation’s values and goals at varying points in the future. The immediateconcerns of satisfying customer needs is considered in relation tolonger-term concerns about where the company wants to be in thefuture. For example, novel features are often considered in terms oftheir benefits and the costs to implement them. However, they mayalso incur maintenance and support costs that will only be realised inthe long run.. . . it is very difficult to weigh [feature ideas and improve-ments] against each other. You have to try to put them againsteach other a bit. That is something that often ends up beingpart of my role. (Product Owner, Company C)(1)Prioritising a backlog similarly involves trade-offs between taskswith differing effort estimates and dependencies. The company mayalso have a longer-term perspective on building a specific customersegment or view a feature as incompatible with the long-term productvision.Let’s say that sales have received five different orders. [Wewould ask them to] discuss and prioritise: which order doyou think is most important [to] get these features [in]? Youhave to look at the effort as well. A feature may be small,[it] could be implemented in two weeks, and it can giveus many new customers. Another feature might be huge orcompletely outside our target group . . . Or we might see thatthis feature [leads in a direction we don’t] want to go . . . itleads to a workflow that we no longer want to encourage. Wewant to solve [something else] instead because we think itwill be better for customers in the long run. (Product Owner,Company C)(2)New features may have architectural implications that impact manyparts of the software system. Knowledge about how the requiredchanges will likely affect the system over time is important input forthe intertemporal choice of whether, when, and how to implement thefeature.5.2.3. Platform choices are always intertemporalPlatform choices are inevitably intertemporal because they combinenear-term concerns of a project with longer-term perspectives of futuresystem maintenance, evolution and re-usability across projects andproducts. For example, when new technical solutions become avail-able, the new possibilities they offer can create intertemporal choicesituations for software companies. Existing investments may pull to thecurrent platform, but a new platform beckons with benefits the currentplatform lacks.. . . it would have been quicker to just continue with the old[platform] and continue developing and expanding it evenfurther. But through the transition [to the new platform],we have partly gained the expertise to write mobile appsusing the same techniques and have a more modular way ofreleasing our products. (Software developer, Scrum master,Company C)(4)Software developers who are responsible for platform developmentface intertemporal choices when it comes to the direction of the plat-form.We have made changes to frameworks and the like that aremostly in the sense of ‘‘this will make it nicer and perhapssave time’’. But sometimes we choose not to do them andinstead postpone. I believe it happens regularly. (Productowner, Software developer, Company C)(5)5.2.4. Testing and QA involve shorter-term intertemporal trade-offsTesting and quality assurance are continuous activities that cen-trally involve a consideration of risks. Time spent on testing can in-crease release times, and testing is often playing catch-up with devel-opment. Making testing and quality assurance activities more efficientis desirable, but the return on investment is often unclear.Some technical designs are meant to mitigate against future prob-lems. Risk analysis – formal or informal – can reveal potential eventsthat have never occurred but are not impossible. These are ambiguousevents, i.e. events for which it is very difficult to get reliable probabilityinformation. The potential future event is ambiguous while the actionto address it in the present is much clearer, including an idea of theeffort involved.5.2.2. Architecture and quality are inherently intertemporalArchitectural decisions, in particular decisions explicitly focused onsoftware quality, need to consider the future evolution of the systemin its dual contexts of use and development. That temporal natureinevitably gives rise to intertemporal choices.. . . We actually had one such example [recently], where wediscussed whether we should exchange a part with our ownservice or incorporate it into another service. And the dis-cussions there were. . . Creating a new service costs us moretime. But then we can deploy it ourselves. (System developer,Scrum master, Company C)(3)Should we implement logging for something that has neverhappened, just in case it might happen? (Product Owner,Company C)(6)Bug fixing can be viewed in isolation as a problem-solving activitythat aims to find the cause for an undesired behaviour and correct it.However, in practice, it is sometimes not possible to focus only on thatsingle problem-solving activity. Some aspect of the undesired behaviourmay have to be addressed very urgently. This creates an intertemporalchoice situation where at least two options must be considered: quicklydeploying a fix that addresses the most pressing need, and taking theInformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)1071638F. Fagerholm et al.time to develop a longer-lasting change. Sometimes, both options canbe taken.[We had a problem that occurred sporadically for a smallnumber of customers.] . . . Last Friday, I tried out a quickfix where I really only increased [a timeout] . . . At the sametime I was doing a bigger job to solve the bigger problem.That was actually a combination of a short-term fix to solvethe problem for the customer, and at the same time [there’s]a solution in progress to solve the bigger problem. (SystemDeveloper, Company C)(7)5.3. Intertemporal choices are uncertain, ambiguous, temporal, and socio-technical (RQ3)Participants described similar situations in their work based on arecognition of salient characteristics, and in doing so, some reflectedon the difference between the presented task and their practice. Inthe following we illustrate how long-established characteristics of in-tertemporal choice situations manifest in concrete examples in SEpractice.5.3.1. Intertemporal choices are often as ambiguous as they are uncertainAcross the range of situations where participants recognised in-tertemporal choices occurring, they emphasised a lack of information,particularly with regard to precise numeric data on effort and proba-bilities of success. This means that rather than dealing with uncertainprobabilities as in the task example, the real-world situations our par-ticipants face in their work lack probabilities – i.e., the participants arefaced with ambiguity. For instance, this is true for Quote (4). Additionalclues in the interview beyond the quote show an explicit sense ofambiguity: there may be large benefits of the new platform, ‘‘but younever know’’. There is an indication of potential time savings that thenew platform could provide in the long run, but also of a negative effectof learning in the present project. Either course of action comes withbenefits and drawbacks – they are mixed outcomes [36] – and they areambiguous.. . . really this is . . . pretty much the way it usually looks . . .you have a feature here to implement. Then you may havesomething else, technical debt or something else that [youhave to consider]. And then maybe there is even less infor-mation, we don’t know how much we save on solving thistechnical debt or whatever it is. So [the scenario presented]is almost better than what we might have in most cases. It’sa bit harder in reality to [make the decision] at least fromour team’s point of view. We have not dealt so much withnumbers and such. (Junior system developer, Company C)Here too, the lack of numeric information supplying probabilitiesthat could be fed into a weighted trade-off analysis is unmistakable:the participant’s work situation does involve trade-offs, and they areintertemporal, but their values are not fixed estimates, ranges, orprobabilities. Ambiguity is in the air.5.3.2. Intertemporal choices extend beyond individual projectsSome intertemporal choices have outcomes that will occur duringthe present project. For others, the outcomes will only occur muchlater. It may be difficult to justify the cost or effort when the benefitcannot be reported for the present project. For example, the time andeffort investment into building internal tools to maintain configurationor production data create intertemporal choices. Where is the best com-promise between a rudimentary way to access data and a full-fledgedinternal product with provisions for access control and data quality?Shifting the time horizon will affect the outlook on this trade-off.Investments in skills development is another intertemporal choice,and its outcomes are often ambiguous. One expectation is that train-ing will lead to increased competence, in turn resulting in increasedefficiency or quality. However, there are other desirable outcomes aswell, such as increased morale and smoother teamwork, and intrinsicvalues to personal development. Thus, the decision to invest in trainingis not as clear-cut and instrumental as adding a feature or developinga tool. But in practice, these decisions sometimes overlap:We have a project right now, in fact, an internal tool for dis-seminating skills. I am probably a little more hesitant towardsit than the team, but it is a huge morale boost for them, andit can work. . . . What tips the scales for me is above all thefact that they want to build it. Had I made the choice myselfin the beginning and not had any such emotional attachmentto it from their side, I would probably have chosen not to doit, and put effort on other things. (Product owner, Softwaredeveloper, Company C)(9)5.3.3. Seemingly technical decisions often involve a range of social concernsDecisions that look ‘‘technical’’ often involve concerns with varyingtimescales and require consultation with a range of stakeholders. Forexample, whether to integrate a third-party library with potential long-term benefits, or spend time on refactoring to reduce technical debt,is ultimately connected to a wide range of concerns in the softwareorganisation. Decision-making processes in software design are at leastas much about understanding the decision situation, developing argu-ments, creating options, and getting support for them, as it is aboutchoosing a particular course of action:I think the first thing would be to talk to people who would bedirectly affected . . . to see if one is thinking about [the idea]correctly. If it directly affects the product, then talk to theproduct [staff]; if it directly impacts the developers, then talkto the developers, and so on. . . . Later, I think it would go toa conversation where everyone was affected, because if timesare affected, the product manager, the product owner and thedevelopers who are the ones that would directly affect thetime would have to talk to each other. (Frontend Developer,Company A)(10)(8)Differences in roles influence decisions. The incentives, focus, andtime horizons implied in a person’s role may alter their perception oftime.Usually consultants think differently. The developer has al-ways in mind the improvement, because this is his job. Theconsultant would focus on being quick, immediate, somethingthat can be shown, on something that can be presented to theclient. . . . The developer’s job is essentially that, to save time,to make things more automated, because of the nature of hiswork. (Software Engineer, Company B)(11)Across different roles, personal characteristics influence preferencesduring decision making. In the following example, the participant seeksa challenge and prefers a demanding deadline, making the task apersonal competition.I . . . strive to measure myself without methodologies thatgive me security, such as ‘‘you can do this in so-and-so manydays because the methodology says so’’. I don’t like thatbecause I don’t like to feel that I’m relaxing, and I feel thatusing methodology is like courting laziness in terms of timedecisions. (Frontend/Backend Developer, Company A)(12)InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)1071639F. Fagerholm et al.Methods should provide structure and thus reduce uncertainty, anda possible locus of decisions to examine could be in the prescriptivestructures of methods. For example, the Architectural Trade-Off Anal-ysis Method ATAM involves the use of scenarios to explore possibleoutcomes [7,8]. Still, the preceding example raises the question of whatrole methods-as-prescribed take on in different contexts. Companiesdiffer in how they organise their practice based on method ideas.Decisions do not fall neatly into any particular method, but are rathersocially situated in the organisation:. . . each company is a different universe, it has a different cul-ture, different methodologies. Even though many companiessay they are agile, each [company] does [agile] differently,has different competencies, and different talent. (ProductManager, Company A)(13)SE methods become highly customised in companies, sometimes tothe extent that we cannot reliably tell what the role of a methodis going to be in a particular organisation. Whether they originatefrom industry itself, from research, or a combination of both, methodsare seldom understood or applied as originally intended, nor appliedin the same way in each situation [67]. Software development canbe seen as epistemic practice characterised by local adaptation anddesign of methods-in-use; a simultaneous unfolding of the system underdevelopment and the development practices [68]. This means thatmethods themselves are subject to interpretation and modification bythose using them in practice. When considering decision-making insoftware design, methods should therefore be treated similarly to othercognitive resources, as part of the uncertain and ambiguous temporalfield in which decisions are made.5.4. SummaryOur interviewees identify intertemporal choices in many areas oftheir work. It appears that intertemporal choices surface throughoutthe practice of software systems development, but are more visible andpronounced in those areas that are explicitly concerned with longer-term evolution, such as architecture. In other words, intertemporalchoices arise whenever teams are faced with opportunities to makedecisions with lasting effects. The range given here should not be takenas complete, but circumscribed by the range of professional experienceof our participants. The examples illustrate how intertemporal choicesare related to and influenced by methods, personal characteristics,company differences, a wide range of concerns in the organisation, anddifferent incentive structures depending on people’s roles.Table 1 groups the examples given above, and additional instancesidentified but not quoted, into general SE areas. It highlights that wecan distinguish the emergence of intertemporal choices also in termsof their own temporality of occurrence – it makes a difference whetheran intertemporal choice is identified early as an opportunity or emergessuddenly as a choice that has to be made. Proactively identified choicescan be more carefully contemplated, but if the outcomes are in the dis-tant future, they tend to be more ambiguous and harder to envision. Atthe other extreme, issues identified in hindsight as missed opportunitiesusually limit the available alternatives – when the critical bug is found,the critical bug has to be fixed.6. A framework for studying intertemporal choice in SEThe results above demonstrate that temporal distance affects ourparticipants’ reasoning in very uneven ways (RQ1) and that intertem-poral decision making is ubiquitous (RQ2). We also found that in-tertemporal choices are often uncertain and ambiguous and alwayssocio-technical (RQ3). We now turn to discussing the implications ofthese findings for how intertemporal choices can be characterised andstudied in SE, addressing RQ4 and our overall guiding question byinterpreting our findings through the lens of judgement and decisionmaking.6.1. A new lens for an old questionThe intertemporal choices that our participants grapple with on adaily basis are not themselves novelties to SE theory. Many of thesetrade-off decisions are precisely what SE methods are designed totackle. The longer-term implications of decisions made about productdevelopment, testing, architecture, or technical debt have constantlymotivated the development of SE tools and methods. For example, soft-ware architecture research has long grappled with the question ‘‘howto make architectural design decisions sustainable’’ [9], i.e., how tomake them last [69]; and technical debt management aims to identifythe optimal balance between short- and long-term interests in softwareprojects [13].What does SE gain from exploring these questions through a psycho-logical lens? Our empirical results show that the psychological view is acrucial frame for understanding the intertemporal nature of systems de-sign. By allowing us to examine common SE decisions as intertemporal,the psychological view provides a new angle on common challenges inSE across multiple aspects of software development, including technicaldebt, architecture, project management, and sustainability. It providesinsights into daily practice that methods miss to account for. It betterexplains what really happens when intertemporal trade-offs occur inpractice, and how systematic methods interact with individual andteam cognition. This is a crucial step towards effectively influencing thechoices and outcomes and develop more sustainable software systems.How software professionals should take these types of decisions hasbeen exhaustively specified. For every question listed in Table 1, asizeable choice of SE methods stands ready to support decision making.This concern with long-term effects of engineering decisions has beenpresent since SE was founded as a discipline over 50 years ago and hasnever lost its central importance. Whether design decisions have gen-uinely become more sustainable during this period is unclear, but therange of available tools and techniques has increased considerably [9].Recognising decisions as intertemporal from a cognitive and psy-chological perspective opens new opportunities for progress on thispersistent challenge. By examining professional practice through thislens, we gain an inside view of the reality of making real-life intertem-poral choices and an opportunity to look deeper into the interactionsbetween methods and their use [68].6.2. Rationalistic and naturalistic approaches to decision making researchOur results raise the question of how to understand decisions in SEpractice. To illustrate how the lens of cognition and psychology canbe applied to that question, let us consider Quote (6) as an example:Should we implement logging for something that has never happened, justin case it might happen? The interviewee, a product owner, recounts anexchange with a developer who suggested logging to be implementedto catch potential errors. The product owner asked probing questionsabout the plausibility of the error based on occurrence in the past andpredictions about the future.One way to understand this could be that decisions should be basedon preconceived mathematical models. In the classic rationalist re-search paradigm dominating SE [48,70], the situation would appearas a case of choice under probabilistic uncertainty. The paradigm’sresponse to probabilistic uncertainty is to treat the situation as aquantitative trade-off problem and model its probabilities, costs, andbenefits to recommend the optimal choice.studiesSimilar ideas have been common in other fields. But extensive em-piricalrationalistic,since the 1960s have shown thatmathematically-founded models of decision making are inconsistentwith empirical observations. This debate is reflected within the historyof SE research too [20]. Just like the discounted utility model, generalmodels of expected utility that form the basis of most multi-criteriadecision making research [23] are built not on studies of how peoplethink, but on game theory [71] and the mathematical axioms ofInformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)10716310F. Fagerholm et al.Table 1Intertemporal choices arise in many areas of our participants’ professional experience. The numbers refer tocorresponding interview quotes.AreaArchitectureand qualityPlatformstrategyTestingProductdevelopmentBeyond theprojectAn opportunity to plan ahead isidentified. Should we . . .Refactor or optimise for performanceand scalability?A choice situation arises. Shouldwe . . .Reuse the existing micro-service?(3)How do we handle long-termimplications of feature changeson our architecture?Should we improve the platform? (5)Migrate to a new platform? (4)Log potential rare errors? (6)Focus on new features or onreducing technical debt? (8)How should we balance thecompeting priorities and featurerequests knowing that their costs andbenefits will shift over time? (1)Fix the bug quickly or develop alonger-term solution? (7)Prioritise the small feature thatcan gain us new customers or thelarger more complex feature thatour existing customers want? (2)Expand our training program? (9)Upgrade our internal tools?Apply a method or work out the unique case? (12)Incorporate a new method to the company’s way of working? (13)Involve a wide range of stakeholders to get their support? (10)Focus on quick delivery or spend time automating? (11)Bernoulli that prescribe how optimal choices should be made in riskysituations such as gambling.Decades of studies reveal that people do think in terms of rational-istic models for clearly circumscribed tasks, while processes such as theRecognition Primed Decisions model (RPD) [72] are used in many lesscircumscribed situations, for example to structure problems [27,73].Evidence for both modes of thinking has been found in SE [48]. Thewildly diverging results in the task portion of our study, and the variedlocations in which our practitioners recognised decisions, suggest thatthe basis for interpreting these decisions must be primarily a natural-istic one, with a normative rationalistic perspective being subordinate.No single, simple model can obtain a good fit to the data, nor can wesay which responses are closest to being optimal.It is thus unsurprising that many practitioners take a pass on ratio-nalistic, normative methods:• By assuming probability estimates, the rationalist paradigm doesnot effectively address the ambiguity that people experience. Asa result, the only way to apply this paradigm’s methods often isto pretend that it is possible to model and compute predictions.This sidesteps facing the actual issue of handling ambiguity. Inthe logging example, ambiguity is handled via deferral. Ratherthan trying to base a decision on information they lack, manypractitioners recognise that they may never need it and choose aform of inaction for now.• The rationalist paradigm provides no mechanism to distinguishbetween the immediate statement and the underlying framingsand reframings that surface when groups discuss what to do.In our example, other interactions earlier and later must beunderstood before these framings become apparent.• The paradigm also does not account for the nature of judgementand expertise as nuanced, reflective, situated forms of knowledge.For example, the person may have intuitive expertise manifestingas the hunch that with shifting context, this will become likely tohappen for the first time. Far from originating in their gut, thishunch may surface because they have analogous experience withother systems that, when repurposed or reused across domains,had run into behavioural patterns previously thought ‘impossible’.They may struggle to articulate this tacit knowledge preciselyunless probed carefully [56,66].6.3. How can we characterise intertemporal SE choices?We are now ready to use concepts from JDM research to structurefuture analyses of intertemporal choices. To characterise intertemporalchoices in SE, our framework accounts for context, commitment, un-certainty and ambiguity, temporality, and the situated cognitive process,as described in Table 2. In the right column, we give an account ofhow the intertemporal choice situation in the logging example can becharacterised in these terms.While mundane, our example shows how differently just a single,simple example can be understood via these five characteristics. Bycharacterising this decision via its context, the commitment made, theuncertainty surrounding it, the temporality, and the cognitive facetsof the decision, we gain a more accurate understanding of real-worldpractice. A normative method of criteria-based choice does not sufficeto address the nature of intertemporal choices: By treating the cognitiveprocess as machinery, the rationalist model prematurely abstracts thenuances of the substance that makes up what happens. This simply doesnot address the real difficulties that practitioners face in a situationwhere they attempt to exercise careful judgement. By appreciating it asa human and social phenomenon taking place in a specific context, wegain the perspective to develop more appropriate ways of supportinggood choices. We need the specific context to make sense of thesituation and understand how intertemporal choices arise. Individualcognitive processes act together on the small-group level to handletemporality and uncertainty and reach a commitment. The cognitive andsocial aspects of practising individuals and teams, the specific projectfactors, the methods and tools used by the teams, the organisationalcontext, and the larger context in which the organisation operates allcome together to influence decision-making.The characteristics above establish the key coordinates and dimen-sions of the objects of study. The guidelines summarised in Table 3 area minimal checklist to consider when designing research studies andin evaluating their outcomes, including in peer-review. The first twoitems address scoping and clarity of what is being studied; the nextthree address clarity in conceptual design on the axes of scope, control,and intervention; the final two address methodology.7. Research directionsThe restrictive design of our initial studies of intertemporal choicerequired participants to complete a particular sequence of questionsInformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)10716311F. Fagerholm et al.Table 2Five characteristics of intertemporal SE choices with an illustrative example.CharacteristicExample and discussionContextCommitmentUncertainty & ambiguityTemporalityCognitionThe context in which the decision occurs, understood for nowin the widest sense as anything that influences the decision.Typically, the context concerns the social and historicalenvironment in which decision makers act [44,45,74]Decisions are commitments to actions. Often, some or allactions are generated by the decision makers in the course ofdecision making [72]. There are often myriads of options, butmany can be defined only in hindsight as the actions to whichthe decision-makers committed or could have committed to.Uncertainty refers to the objective probability of potentialoutcomes. Ambiguity means that only vague information aboutthe probabilities is available [75]. This uncertainty aboutuncertainty complicates how people think about possibleoutcomes when they decide [76]. It may be uncertain whethersomething will happen, who it will happen to, and what itwould mean. The distinction between the two matters becausethey are different and must be handled differently.The temporal dimension separates possible outcomes acrosstime and can involve multiple timescales that need to beconsidered simultaneously. Time always introduces uncertaintyabout the outcomes and often also ambiguity regarding both theoptions and the outcomes [1,36,47].The situated cognitive processes of individual decision-makerspossibly acting as a group need to be seen in context [56,57,77].Intertemporal choice raises difficult questions about cognition.For example, people differ in their ambiguity attitude: some aredrawn to ambiguous options, others avoid them. Attitudestowards ambiguity depend on the likelihood of the uncertainevents, the domain of the outcome, and the source thatgenerates the uncertainty [78]. Decisions must be characterisednot only by the temporal separation of outcomes but also byhow the outcome uncertainty is perceived by decision-makers.This team-based agile company uses projects to develop newfeatures for their products, which are delivered as Softwareas a Service. The time horizon of team responsibility extendsbeyond projects, with longer-term relations to customers(SMEs in a range of domains). Slowly shifting customersegments can cause domain contexts and user behaviour toevolve.The initial question is ‘‘To log or not to log’’, butpresumably, there will be more nuanced options available togenerate (‘‘Let’s do a minimum amount of logging?’’).Uncertainty and ambiguity are in the air. While theanticipated incident to log has never happened before,someone brought it up because they believe it might. Withshifting domain contexts, currently improbable behaviourmay become more likely, but hard to estimate – in a word,ambiguous. In fact, the quote itself is ambiguous. Did youread it as suggesting that it should be done? Then imagine itstarting as ‘‘Should we really implement logging...?’’ Thismay better capture the nuance in the ambiguous Swedishoriginal.The time dimension is open-ended, extending beyond thecurrent sprint and the completion of the current project.Outcomes are in an ambiguous future. The quote also harksback to the past in noting that nothing bad has happenedyet.The story suggests a value of ‘being prepared’, raising theexplicit trade-off: ‘how should we allocate our time?’. Thereis already a compromise in the option: do not invest time toprevent an unlikely outcome, but maybe invest just enoughtime to detect it. The product owner emphasised the agilevalue of avoiding unnecessary work. They decided not toimplement logging ‘just in case it might happen’. The rolesinvolved brought distinct framings, interests and motivationsto the group decision. Different kinds of authority were atplay: management by virtue of allocated responsibility, aseasoned developer by virtue of their expertise as recognisedvia their reputation.Table 3Research guidelines: How should we study intertemporal SE choices?ThedecisionDiscountingScopeControlInterventionMethodReplicationClearly describe each element of intertemporal choice (commitment, uncertainty, temporality, situatedcognition, context) to position each decision in its situation and social context. The distinction betweenuncertainty and ambiguity is crucial [75,76,78]. Research designs should be flexible enough to recognise thatdecisions happen not only where prescriptive methods place them, but at any point where those involved canmake different commitments. In some cases, commitment(s) only become visible in hindsight. Follow the leadof practitioners when they make decisions differently from how, where and when the methods prescribe them.When it comes to describing and evaluating intertemporal choices, studies must follow the state of the art inJDM research. This requires caution in the face of normative models of temporal discounting and carefulselection of measurement methods (such as the use of AUC as a theory-free measure of time preference [22]),and it means we must examine the interactions between perception, time preference, and the psychologicaldistance [79] between decision-makers and those who are influenced.Position each study carefully in the systemic context it examines to explicitly draw the boundaries of concern:what is observed, what is assumed, what is cut out from attention, and why?Carefully substantiate which contextual elements and relationships are controlled and which are not, andevaluate what degree of freedom this introduces and how.Clearly define the element of intervention, if any, and if possible, include control groups with no intervention.Carefully consider established methods for observational and interventional studies to increase validity.Clearly specify and justify the research method. The topic of intertemporal choice has been investigated foralmost two centuries [1], and fields such as JDM have accumulated vast methodological experience thatshould be reused and repurposed before developing SE-specific research methods. That said, the nature ofdecisions and situations in systems design is peculiar. For example, the nature of professional expertisedistinguishes our participants from many consumer-focused studies in JDM, and the nature of temporality isbaked into the domain. So at some point, with sufficient stable ground under our feet, we will be in aposition to build new methodologies more attuned to socio-technical design work.Document and release study designs, protocols, and data to enable replication, making use of open datarepositories (examples exist, e.g., [65]). The overall emphasis should be on the recoverability of researchdesign choices, since direct replication is not suitable for all studies [63,80]. Where applicable, invite othersto replicate the work, both in direct collaboration but also as independent work; be prepared to support thereplicators with clarifications, details, and data if needed. Carefully consider guidelines on replication [81].InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)10716312F. Fagerholm et al.with minimal researcher interaction. As we stated then [22],‘‘Allwe know is that people behave as if they would perform temporaldiscounting. We have not identified how or why this effect takes place,nor do we have a ‘gold standard’ of optimal decision making. There isno optimal decision to be made in the presented scenario, and there aremany good reasons for discounting uncertain future outcomes’’. Thisstill holds true. Because the study design did not examine participants’cognitive processes nor allowed them to interrogate the scenario andthe provided information, the findings do not explain the reasoning un-derlying their responses. As noted in previous work [3,82], knowledgeof cognitive processes is important for understanding in depth how andwhy certain behaviours come about. Consequently, this article preparesthe ground to couple quantitative observations of behaviours with aqualitative study of cognition to elucidate the underlying reasoning.Beyond the scope of this article, our current research examines howour participants reasoned about intertemporal choices, which factorsthey considered, and how. As a new lens to an old question, this is apromising area of empirical SE research.What can we do with this new understanding? Practically, it imme-diately changes how a decision making researcher in SE who encoun-ters the logging example above analyses the situation.1. They embed the view of the decision (commitment ) itself to thesituation (context ) in which it takes place to better understandthe factors that influence the outcome of the situated cognitiveprocesses using the CTA methods presented here.2. They evaluate the context of decision making and identify whichfactors contribute to short sighted commitments and could beremoved, and which factors contribute to wise judgements andcould be amplified.3. They identify and map the temporal scales of relevance in thesituation, measure discounting and identify patterns, and makeintentional choices about the temporal horizon and scope.4. They make visible the sources of uncertainty and ambiguity so theycan each be addressed appropriately.5. They study the situated cognitive processes of decision makersto identify their cognitive strategies and patterns of individualstrengths.The effects are twofold. Practically, this research can produce tech-niques to address factors that are understood to distort decision makingin a particular context, it can enable newcomers to learn from experi-enced decision makers, and it can produce effective interventions thatallow teams to be more intentional about their choices.Building up from this practical application, broader use of thisframework will grow a robust body of empirical findings on the factorsoften considered in specific types of SE decisions, the cognitive heuris-tics and patterns of reasoning often employed by practitioners, and thebest methods and tools to support them, including (new versions of)conventional trade-off analysis methods. This suggests a much morecomprehensive research programme than that implied by normativerationalistic models and methods. We argue here that this programmemust be firmly grounded in naturalistic perspectives and referencedisciplines such as psychology.Investigating the factors influencing intertemporal choice throughCTA studies is a key step to understanding what changes can bemost effective to increase the sustainability of decisions. The goalshould be to promote sustainable software design decisions, whetherwe seek to avoid locking ourselves into inflexible technical designs,setting ourselves up for large future costs, or harming our societiesor the disadvantaged. Some situations are more conducive to producesustainable decisions, but what are they like and how do they work?Many starting points for research questions wait in the baseline we havepresented. For example, intertemporal choice behaviour varies wildlyacross different studies and participants [1]. Why did our participantswith a broader range of work experience discount future choices lessthan others [22]? Broad experience may bring with it the ability tomake more detailed mental simulations or to use richer imagination toconsider the implications of different options.Situational characteristics that can influence the sustainability ofdesign decisions include the time horizon of projects, staff turnover,reward and incentive systems, distribution of responsibility, and con-tracts. What are regular patterns of situational characteristics thattend to foster (un)sustainable decisions? An empirically grounded,robust collection of situational patterns and anti-patterns can providehighly impactful starting points for translating insights into practicalimprovements and pedagogical materials. An effort-intensive but verypromising approach is the ethnographic study of industry practice sen-sitised to naturalistic decision making concepts and methods, buildingon the work of decision making researchers [34] and SE ethnogra-phers [83]. Staying with the action with the help of these organisingprinciples should allow researchers to take the field’s understanding ofits practice to new levels.8. Validity and limitationsJDM research has long had to navigate the spectrum of settingsbetween artificial ‘lab’ studies and naturalistic studies [66,84], in-cluding in SE [48]. Simplified context-free prompts, while popularin behavioural economics research, have questionable ecological valid-ity on their own – i.e., they may describe the behaviour of peoplein an experiment, but that behaviour has little to do with the realworld [20,85]. On the other end of the spectrum, ethnographic studiesare time-consuming and challenging. Before our study, the prospectof an ethnographic study of intertemporal choice in industry practicewas unclear. It was not clear how to reliably recognise intertemporalchoices because they often remain hidden and because their effects areoften significantly delayed – it may only become obvious when effectsoccur, and the researcher may have left the situation by then. Theframework presented here is an important step to make such studiesfeasible in the future.Our study design considers this trade-off in the task design andchoice of a questionnaire, embedded in the CTA protocol. As discussed,the incident serves as a probe to trigger reflections on real worldpractice. The overall study design, including interviewer guidance, wasrefined through a series of pilots conducted by all researchers in eachof the languages.As a cognitive task analysis study, our study draws on a traditionof naturalistic research. The appropriate criteria for such studies havebeen extensively debated in qualitative research [86–89]. Therefore,our main concerns are with credibility, i.e., the degree to which thefindings represent an authentic conception of the reality in which theyoccurred, and transferability, i.e., the degree to which the findings fromthis particular context can be usefully transferred to other contexts.The credibility of our findings is affected by the role of the re-searchers, the conceptual identification of intertemporal choice throughthe task, the analysis of evidence, and the interpretation of what ourparticipants mean.The interview protocol increases reliability across interviews andminimises researcher bias. The pilot interviews served to establish aconsistent basis. Guidance incorporated in the interview guide alsosafeguards against leading questions and conceptual priming. Duringanalysis, we remained alert to interviewer interference to avoid anyinterpretations planted by interviewer questions or comments.For the intertemporal choice task itself, it is important to assureconstruct validity for the intertemporal choice task and the measurementof discounting. This plays out in two facets. First, we rely on a taskdesign validated in several prior studies. Second, for the measurementof temporal discounting, we rely on the theory-free AUC as establishedby prior research on intertemporal choice in JDM and SE [22].Triangulation of evidence is built into the study design in combiningthe task, observable responses, think-aloud protocol and interviews.InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)10716313F. Fagerholm et al.This is not only considered in holistic interpretations such as for RQ2but also reflexively incorporated into the interview itself, where earliercomments of the participant and observations of the interviewer canbecome the subject of subsequent follow-up questions. During analysis,we searched for disproving evidence too. We looked at whether someparticipants did not recognise the scenario in their own work. We alsolooked beyond the aggregate measures of the quantitative task data tofind deviating patterns.Some limitations on credibility remain. No member checking ofour interpretations for RQ2 and RQ3 was performed due to practicalpandemic circumstances. However, member checking of the behaviourof temporal discounting is built into the interview protocol: we showour participants prior study results and inquire retrospectively andintrospectively into the participant’s interpretation of the task. Bydoing so, the interview itself allows participants to construct their ownconceptual understanding of intertemporal choice and helps them todo some of the interpretive work. By facilitating our interviewees’ in-terpretation of intertemporal choice, the study design reduces the con-ceptual distance between interviewee and knowledge representation,thus increasing credibility.Transferability refers to the ability to apply study results onto set-tings beyond the one studied. While this is ultimately the responsibilityof the person making the new application, we have sought to strengthentransferability by a flexible grounded approach to analysis, by theuse of authentic descriptions of examples given by the participants.Conducting the study in multiple companies in multiple countrieswith multiple researchers already involved transferring it. The findingsand concepts are designed to be logically transferable such that otherresearchers can study other industry contexts, other teams, other de-velopment methods, and other tasks. We consciously refrained fromdeveloping strong taxonomies, e.g. by basing the response to RQ2 onSWEBOK knowledge areas. This would limit transferability becausethese taxonomies entail assumptions about the theory and terminologyused in different contexts. Instead, our flexible scenario is not tied apriori to the companies or to any concrete SE paradigm or method,such as agile methods. Our participants do the conceptual embeddingin their environments and situations. Moments of friction in which theyemphasise differences to their own environment serve in fact as usefulentry points for follow-up questions.9. ConclusionsAs software pervades society, SE is now faced with challenges thatgo far beyond what most methods used today are prepared to address.A software system can impact people beyond the customer, users,and other stakeholders that current practices identify. Once we startlooking, intertemporal choices can be found everywhere in systemsdesign. Their temporal nature provides important clues to how systemsdesign could become more sustainable. By appreciating intertemporalchoice from a JDM perspective, we gain new opportunities for researchand innovation. Intertemporal choice brings a new lens to a centralquestion of SE.In intertemporal choice, the when of the outcome intersects with thewho. The decision-makers of the present may not be the ones who bearthe consequences of their designs in the future. Decision-makers canmore readily identify stakeholders close to themselves and cater to theirneeds than those who are distant. Stakeholders may be both internalto the software organisation, such as the developers who must dealwith past design choices, and external, yet unknown groups of peoplewhose lives are affected. As consequences shift further into the future,knowing who will be affected, and how, becomes increasingly difficult.But even when those more distant stakeholders could be considered,they often are not.Situations in which intertemporal choices are made are often asambiguous as they are uncertain. We have shown that some softwareprofessionals exhibit temporal discounting, but others do not. Whyand how do their reasons differ? What can we learn to make futuredecisions more sustainable? The range of behaviours suggests thatmany different factors play into intertemporal choices. To characterisethese decisions, and other similar situations, we introduced a set of fivecharacteristics and showed how such a characterisation can result inviewpoints different from those of prevailing rationalistic approaches.Our example shows how to unpack the intertemporal characteristics ofconcrete situations that arise in everyday software projects and huntfor more situations to examine. The protocol we have presented yieldsmuch richer data than we can cover in this paper. Future analysesshould move beyond the questions and analyses discussed here.Promising opportunities for studies await. We suggested a direc-tion towards SE interventions that aim for more sustainable decisionswhen a temporal aspect is involved, and presented a foundation forfuture studies. We offer our previous work with openly published datasets [22,53], and the materials of the present study [54], as potentialstarting points for inspiration. Intertemporal choice offers a new angleon a problem as old as SE. It is now time to forge a perspectivewhere consequences at different points in the future can be taken intoaccount for a much wider range of stakeholders than SE methods haveacknowledged before. An upfront investment into such studies will soonreap significant rewards.CRediT authorship contribution statementFabian Fagerholm: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation,Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – re-view & editing, Visualization, Supervision. Andres De los Ríos: Formalanalysis, Writing – review & editing. Carol Cárdenas Castro: Investi-gation, Writing – review & editing. Jenny Gil: Investigation, Writing– review & editing. Alexander Chatzigeorgiou: Investigation, Writing– review & editing. Apostolos Ampatzoglou: Investigation, Writing –review & editing. Christoph Becker: Conceptualization, Methodology,Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Writing – originaldraft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.Declaration of competing interestNo author associated with this paper has disclosed any potential orpertinent conflicts which may be perceived to have impending conflictwith this work. For full disclosure statements refer to https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2023.107163.Data availabilityA dataset and replication information is available online at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7646337.AcknowledgementsThis work was partially funded by NSERC, Canada RGPIN-2016-06640. Data were collected while FF was a Postdoctoral Fellow at theUniversity of Toronto. We thank Rahul Mohanani for inputs to studydesign.References[1] S. Frederick, G. Loewenstein, T. O’Donoghue, Time discounting and timepreference: A critical review, J. Econ. Lit. 40 (2) (2002) 351–401.[2] S. Beecham, N. Baddoo, T. Hall, H. Robinson, H. Sharp, Motivation in Soft-ware Engineering: A systematic literature review, Inf. Softw. Technol. 50 (9)(2008) 860–878, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2007.09.004, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950584907001097.[3] P. Lenberg, R. Feldt, L.G. Wallgren, Behavioral software engineering: A definitionand systematic literature review, J. Syst Softw 107 (2015) 15–37.[4] M. Sánchez-Gordón, R. Colomo-Palacios, Taking the emotional pulse of softwareengineering — A systematic literature review of empirical studies, Inf. Softw.Technol. 115 (2019) 23–43.InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)10716314F. Fagerholm et al.[5] F. Fagerholm, M. Felderer, D. Fucci, M. Unterkalmsteiner, B. Marculescu, M.Martini, L.G.W. Tengberg, R. Feldt, B. Lehtelä, B. Nagyváradi, J. Khattak,Cognition in software engineering: A taxonomy and survey of a half-centuryof research, ACM Comput. Surv (2022) http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3508359.[6] H. van Vliet, A. Tang, Decision making in software architecture, J. Syst. Softw.[29] R. Lipshitz, G. Klein, J. Orasanu, E. Salas, Taking stock of naturalistic decisionmaking, J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 14 (5) (2001) 331–352, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bdm.381.[30] Oxford Dictionary, Decision, 2020, URL: https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/decision.117 (2016) 638–644, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2016.01.017.[31] Oxford Dictionary, Choice, Lexico Dictionaries English, 2020, URL: https://www.[7] R. Kazman, M. Klein, P. Clements, ATAM: Method for architecture evaluation,lexico.com/en/definition/choice.Carnegie-Mellon Univ Pittsburgh PA Software Engineering Inst, 2000.[32] Oxford Dictionary, Decision, 2020, URL: https://www.lexico.com/definition/[8] P. Clements, Evaluating Software Architectures: Methods and Case Studies, in:judgement.SEI series in software engineering, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2002.[9] U. Zdun, Sustainable Architectural Design Decisions, IEEE Softw 30 (6) (2013)46–53.[10] P. Avgeriou, M. Stal, R. Hilliard, Architecture Sustainability [Guest editors’introduction], IEEE Software 30 (6) (2013) 40–44, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MS.2013.120.[11] D. Falessi, G. Cantone, R. Kazman, P. Kruchten, Decision-making techniques forsoftware architecture design: A comparative survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 43 (4)(2011) 33:1–33:28, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978802.1978812.[12] Z. Li, P. Avgeriou, P. Liang, A systematic mapping study on technical debtand its management, J. Syst. Softw. 101 (2015) 193–220, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2014.12.027, URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164121214002854.[13] P. Avgeriou, P. Kruchten, I. Ozkaya, C. Seaman, Managing Technical Debt inSoftware Engineering (Dagstuhl Seminar 16162), in: P. Avgeriou, P. Kruchten,I. Ozkaya, C. Seaman (Eds.), Dagstuhl Reports 6 (4) (2016) 110–138, http://dx.doi.org/10.4230/DagRep.6.4.110, URL: http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2016/6693.[14] N.A. Ernst, S. Bellomo, I. Ozkaya, R.L. Nord, I. Gorton, Measure It? ManageIt? Ignore It? Software Practitioners and Technical Debt, in: Proceedings of the2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering, in: ESEC/FSE2015, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 50–60, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2786805.2786848, URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2786805.2786848.[15] W.N. Behutiye, P. Rodríguez, M. Oivo, A. Tosun, Analyzing the concept ofin the context of agile software development: A systematictechnical debtliterature review, Inf. Softw. Technol. 82 (2017) 139–158, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.10.004, URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950584916302890.[16] A. Mohamed, G. Ruhe, A. Eberlein, COTS Selection: Past, Present, and Future, in:14th Annual IEEE International Conference and Workshops on the Engineeringof Computer-Based Systems (ECBS’07), 2007, pp. 103–114, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ECBS.2007.28.[17] A.S. Jadhav, R.M. Sonar, Evaluating and selecting software packages: Areview,Inf. Softw. Technol. 51 (3) (2009) 555–563, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2008.09.003, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950584908001262.[18] T. Amanatidis, N. Mittas, A. Chatzigeorgiou, A. Ampatzoglou, L. Angelis, TheDeveloper’s Dilemma: Factors Affecting the Decision to Repay Code Debt,in: Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Technical Debt, in:TechDebt ’18, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2018, pp. 62–66, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3194164.3194174.[19] Z. Durdik, B. Klatt, H. Koziolek, K. Krogmann, J. Stammel, R. Weiss, Sustain-ability guidelines for long-living software systems, in: Proc. ICSM, 2012, pp.517–526, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSM.2012.6405316.[20] C. Becker, D. Walker, C. McCord, Intertemporal choice: Decision making and timein software engineering, in: Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop onCooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering, CHASE ’17, IEEE Press,Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2017, pp. 23–29, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CHASE.2017.6.[21] C. Becker, R. Chitchyan, S. Betz, C. McCord, Trade-off decisions across time intechnical debt management: A systematic literature review, in: Proceedings ofthe 2018 International Conference on Technical Debt, TechDebt ’18, ACM, NewYork, NY, USA, 2018, pp. 85–94, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3194164.3194171.[22] F. Fagerholm, C. Becker, A. Chatzigeorgiou, S. Betz, L. Duboc, B. Penzenstadler,R. Mohanani, C.C. Venters, Temporal discounting in software engineering: Areplication study, in: 2019 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on EmpiricalSoftware Engineering and Measurement, ESEM, 2019, pp. 1–12.[23] R.L. Keeney, H. Raiffa, Decisions with Multiple Objectives: Preferences and ValueTrade-Offs, Cambridge University Press, 1993.[24] T.L. Saaty, Fundamentals of Decision Making and Priority Theory with theAnalytic Hierarchy Process, RWS Publications, 1994.[25] R. Mohanani, I. Salman, B. Turhan, P. Rodriguez, P. Ralph, Cognitive Biasesin Software Engineering: A Systematic Mapping Study, IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.(2018) 1, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2018.2877759, arXiv: 1707.03869.[33] P. Ralph, E. Tempero, Characteristics of Decision-making During Coding, in:Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessmentin Software Engineering, in: EASE ’16, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2016, pp.34:1–34:10, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2915970.2915990.[34] G.A. Klein (Ed.), Decision making in action: models and methods, Ablex Pub.,Norwood, N.J., 1993.[35] G. Loewenstein, D. Read, R.F. Baumeister, Time and Decision: Economic andPsychological Perspectives of Intertemporal Choice, Russell Sage Foundation,New York, NY, USA, 2003.[36] D. Soman, G. Ainslie, S. Frederick, X. Li, J. Lynch, P. Moreau, A. Mitchell, D.Read, A. Sawyer, Y. Trope, K. Wertenbroch, G. Zauberman, The psychologyof intertemporal discounting: Why are distant events valued differently fromproximal ones? Marketing Lett 16 (3) (2005) 347–360.[37] P.A. Samuelson, A note on measurement of utility, Rev. Econom. Stud. 4 (2)(1937) 155–161.[38] J.E. Mazur, An adjusting procedure for studying delayed reinforcement,in:Quantitative Analyses of Behavior. the Effect of Delay and Intervening Eventson Reinforcement Value, vol. 5, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1987, pp. 55–73.[39] D.J. Hardisty, K. Fox-Glassman, D. Krantz, E.U. Weber, How to Measure DiscountRates? An Experimental Comparison of Three Methods, (ID 1961367) SSRN,2011, URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1961367.[40] J.R. Doyle, Survey of time preference, delay discounting models, Judgment andDecision Making 8 (2012).[41] J. Myerson, L. Green, M. Warusawitharana, Area under the curve as a measureof discounting, J. Exp. Anal. Behav. 76 (2) (2001) 235–243.[42] R.H. Thaler, C.R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth,and Happiness, Yale University Press, 2008.[43] R.H. Thaler, C.R. Sunstein, J.P. Balz, Choice architecture, SSRN (2010) URL:http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1583509.[44] G. Klein, K.G. Ross, B.M. Moon, D.E. Klein, R.R. Hoffman, E. Hollnagel,Macrocognition, IEEE Intell. Syst. 18 (3) (2003) 81–85.[45] J.M. Schraagan, G. Klein, R.R. Hoffman, The macrocognition framework ofnaturalistic decision making, in: J.M. Schraagan, L.G. Militello, T. Ormerod,R. Lipshitz (Eds.), Naturalistic Decision Making and Macrocognition, AshgatePublishing Limited Aldershot, 2008, pp. 3–25.[46] M. Coller, M.B. Williams, Eliciting individual discount rates, Exper. Econ 2 (2)(1999) 107–127, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01673482.[47] G. Zauberman, B.K. Kim, S.A. Malkoc, J.R. Bettman, Discounting Time and TimeDiscounting: Subjective Time Perception and Intertemporal Preferences, J. Mar.Res. 46 (4) (2009) 543–556, http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.46.4.543.[48] C. Zannier, M. Chiasson, F. Maurer, A model of design decision making basedon empirical results of interviews with software designers, Qualitative SoftwareEngineering Research, Inf. Softw. Technol. 49 (6) (2007) 637–653, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2007.02.010.[49] D. Tofan, M. Galster, P. Avgeriou, W. Schuitema, Past and future of softwarearchitectural decisions – A systematic mapping study, Inf. Softw. Technol. 56(8) (2014) 850–872, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2014.03.009.[50] D.L. Parnas, Software Aging, in: Proceedings of the 16th International ConferenceIEEE Computer Society Press, LosICSE ’94,in:on Software Engineering,Alamitos, CA, USA, 1994, pp. 279–287.[51] P.G. Neumann, The foresight saga, redux, Commun. ACM 55 (10) (2012) 26–29,http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2347736.2347746.[52] S. McConnell, Technical debt, 2007, URL: http://www.construx.com/10x_Software_Development/Technical_Debt.[53] C. Becker, F. Fagerholm, R. Mohanani, A. Chatzigeorgiou, Temporal discountingin technical debt: How do software practitioners discountthe future? in:Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Technical Debt, TechDebt’19, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2019, pp. 23–32, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TechDebt.2019.00011.[54] F. Fagerholm, A. De los Ríos, C. Cárdenas Castro, J. Gil, A. Chatzigeorgiou, A.Ampatzoglou, C. Becker, Dataset and replication information for It’s About Time:How to Study Intertemporal Choice in Systems Design, 2023, http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7646338.[55] G. Gigerenzer, R. Selten (Eds.), Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox, 1st[26] G. Keren, G. Wu (Eds.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of judgment and decisionedition edition, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, 2001.making, Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, West Sussex, 2015.[56] B. Crandall, G. Klein, R.R. Hoffman, Working Minds: A Practitioner’s Guide To[27] G. Loewenstein, S. Rick, J.D. Cohen, Neuroeconomics, Ann. Rev. Psychol. 59 (1)Cognitive Task Analysis, first ed., A Bradford Book, Cambridge, Mass, 2006.(2008) 647–672.[57] J.M. Schraagen, S.F. Chipman, V.L. Shalin (Eds.), Cognitive Task Analysis,[28] G. Keren, G. Wu, A Bird’s-Eye View of the History of Judgment and Deci-sion Making,in: The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Judgment and DecisionMaking, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2015, pp. 1–39, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118468333.ch1.Psychology Press, Mahwah, N.J, 2000.[58] R.R. Hoffman, B. Crandall, N. Shadbolt, Use of the critical decision methodto elicit expert knowledge: A case study in the methodology of cognitive taskanalysis, Human Factors 40 (2) (1998) 254–276.InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)10716315F. Fagerholm et al.[59] G.A. Klein, R. Calderwood, D. MacGregor, Critical decision method for elicitingknowledge, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 19 (3) (1989) 462–472, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/21.31053.[74] G. Klein, C. Wright, Macrocognition: From theory to toolbox, Front. Psychol 7(2016) 54.[75] D. Ellsberg, Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms, Q. J. Econ. 75 (4) (1961)[60] K.A. Ericsson, H.A. Simon, Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports As Data., the MIT643.Press, USA, 1984.[61] J. Hughes, S. Parkes, Trends in the use of verbal protocol analysis in softwareengineering research, Behav. Inform. Technol. 22 (2) (2003) 127–140.[62] R. Thaler, Some empirical evidence on dynamic inconsistency, Econom. Lett. 8(3) (1981) 201–207, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0165-1765(81)90067-7.[63] O.S. Gómez, N. Juristo, S. Vegas, Understanding replication of experimentsin software engineering: A classification, Inf. Softw. Technol. 56 (8) (2014)1033–1048.[64] EPAM, EPAM expandsgrowingglobaland2021,https://www.epam.com/about/newsroom/press-releases/2021/epam-deliveryURL:expands-presence-in-latin-america-enhancing-global-delivery-and-growing-top-engineering-talent-in-the-region, Accessed: 2022-07-29.enhancingregion,presencetopengineeringamerica,talentlatintheinin[65] F. Fagerholm, C. Becker, A. Chatzigeorgiou, S. Betz, L. Duboc, B. Penzenstadler,R. Mohanani, C. Venters, Dataset and replication package for Temporal Dis-counting in Software Engineering: A Replication Study, Zenodo, 2019, http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3257378.[66] G.A. Klein, Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions, MIT Press, Cambridge,1998.[67] B. Fitzgerald, Formalized systems development methodologies: A criticalperspective, Inf. Syst. J. 6 (1) (1996) 3–23.[68] Y. Dittrich, What does it mean to use a method? Towards a practice theory forsoftware engineering, Inf. Softw. Technol. 70 (2016) 220–231.[69] C.C. Venters, R. Capilla, S. Betz, B. Penzenstadler, T. Crick, S. Crouch, E.Y.Nakagawa, C. Becker, C. Carrillo, Software sustainability: Research and practicefrom a software architecture viewpoint, J. Syst. Softw. 138 (2018) 174–188, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2017.12.026, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164121217303072.[70] P. Ralph, The two paradigms of software development research, Sci. Comput.Progr 156 (2018) 68–89, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2018.01.002.[71] J. Von Neumann, O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior,[76] C. Camerer, M. Weber, Recent developments in modeling preferences: Uncer-tainty and ambiguity, J. Risk and Uncertainty 5 (4) (1992) 325–370, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00122575.[77] L.A. Suchman, Human-Machine Reconfigurations: Plans and Situated Actions,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2007.[78] S.T. Trautmann, G. van de Kuilen, Ambiguity attitudes, in: G. Keren, G. Wu(Eds.), The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making, JohnWiley & Sons, Ltd, 2015, pp. 89–116.[79] Y. Trope, N. Liberman, Temporal construal, Psychol. Rev. 110 (3) (2003) 403,http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.110.3.403.[80] J. Miller, Replicating software engineering experiments: a poisoned chalice orthe Holy Grail, Inf. Softw. Technol. 47 (4) (2005) 233–244.[81] J.C. Carver, N. Juristo, M.T. Baldassarre, S. Vegas, Replications of softwareengineering experiments, Empir. Softw. Eng. 19 (2) (2014) 267–276.[82] M. Petre, J. Buckley, L. Church, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, BehavioralScience of Software Engineering, IEEE Software 37 (6) (2020) 21–25, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MS.2020.3014413, Conference Name: IEEE Software.[83] H. Sharp, Y. Dittrich, C.R.B. de Souza, The Role of Ethnographic Studies inEmpirical Software Engineering, IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 42 (8) (2016) 786–804,http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2016.2519887.[84] C.E. Zsambok, G.A. Klein (Eds.), Naturalistic decision making, L. ErlbaumAssociates, Mahwah, N.J., 1997, URL: http://www.tandfebooks.com/isbn/9781315806129.[85] R. Harper, D. Randall, W.W. Sharrock, Choice: The Sciences of Reason in the21st Century: A Critical Assessment, Polity Press, Cambridge, UK ; Malden, MA,2016, OCLC.[86] Y. Lincoln, E. Guba, Naturalistic Inquiry, SAGE Publications, Newbury Park, Calif,1985.[87] J.W. Creswell, D.L. Miller, Determining validity in qualitative inquiry, TheoryInto Pract 39 (3) (2000) 124–130.[88] J. Maxwell, Qualitative Research Design: An Interactive Approach, third ed.,Princeton University Press, 1944.SAGE Publications, 2013.[72] G.A. Klein, The recognition-primed decision (RPD) model: Looking back, looking[89] J. Lewis, Redefining qualitative methods: Believability in the fifth moment, Int.forward, Naturalistic Decision Making (1997) 285–292.J. Qualit. Methods 8 (2) (2009) 1–14.[73] D. Kahneman, G. Klein, Conditions for intuitive expertise: A failure to disagree,Am. Psychol. 64 (6) (2009) 515–526, http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0016755.InformationandSoftwareTechnology158(2023)10716316