Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439Contents lists available at ScienceDirectArtificial Intelligencewww.elsevier.com/locate/artintMcCarthy variations in a modal keyJohan van Benthem a,b,∗a University of Amsterdam, Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC), P.O. Box 94242, Amsterdam, GE, Netherlandsb Stanford, United Statesa r t i c l ei n f oa b s t r a c tWe take a fresh look at some major strands in John McCarthy’s work from a logician’sperspective. First, we re-analyze circumscription in dynamic logics of belief change underhard and soft information. Next, we re-analyze the regression method in the SituationCalculus in terms of update axioms for dynamic–epistemic temporal logics. Finally, wedraw some general methodological comparisons between ‘Logical AI’ and practices inmodal logic, pointing at some creative tensions.© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Article history:Available online 3 April 2010Keywords:CircumscriptionFixed-point logicStructural rulesBelief changeSituation CalculusTemporal logicRegression methodDynamic epistemic logic1. IntroductionJohn McCarthy is a colleague whom I have long respected and admired. He is a truly free spirit who always commu-nicates about issues in an open-minded way, away from beaten academic tracks and entrenched academic ranks. Eachencounter has been a pleasure, from being involved with his creative Ph.D. students in Logical AI (each a remarkable char-acter) to his lively presence at our CSLI workshop series on Logic, Language and Computation – and most recently, hisparticipation in the Handbook of the Philosophy of Information [1]. Interacting with John makes me see my own work andmy field in new ways, even in places where I eventually disagree. This brief note presents three illustrations. As a logician,I find John’s work intriguing because it is clearly about logic, but not in the ‘internal’ professional mode that I am usedto. True, many ideas of his have provided grist to our technical mills, and that is good. But more importantly, John’s workreminds us of broader issues: what logic should be about, and also, what methodology best suits the resulting agenda. Allthese themes play in my illustrations. In doing so, I merely give new perspectives on what exists, pointing out some newdirections: there are no new formal results.2. Circumscription, logical consequence, and logical dynamicsMy first encounter with the classic [18] introducing circumscription was when my student Wilfried Meyer Viol rushedinto my office, and said he had just seen the first truly new logical idea in years, and that: not coming from a logician!We quickly read the paper, and I was struck at once by the liberating effect of other consequence relations that retain basicstructure that makes them ‘logical’, while breaking new ground in terms of new varieties of reasoning. Ever since, I have* Address for correspondence: University of Amsterdam,Netherlands.E-mail address: johan.vanbenthem@uva.nl.URL: http://staff.science.uva.nl/~johan.Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC), P.O. Box 94242, Amsterdam, GE,0004-3702/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2010.04.014J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439429been intrigued by what circumscription means, and I will tell a bit of the story up to my current somewhat iconoclasticreinterpretation.2.1. Classical consequence, circumscription, and beyondMinimal models. Classical consequence from premises P to a conclusion C says that all models of P are models for C . Themodels for P are the current range of options, encoding what we know: a logical conclusion does not add to that knowledge,but elucidates it. McCarthy [18] taught us that problem solving and planning go beyond this format, getting more out of thestated premises in special models that are most congenial to the scenario at hand. A circumscriptive consequence from P toC says thatC is true in all minimal models for P .Here, minimality refers to some relevant comparison order for models: inclusion of object domains, inclusion of denotationsfor specified predicates, and so on. The general idea is minimizing over any reflexive–transitive order of ‘relative plausi-bility’ [28].1 This is not just a trick for problem solving: circumscription seems a natural phenomenon in common sensereasoning broadly construed.Circumscription and classical logics. Circumscription quickly caught the imagination of logicians, since it raises new ques-tions about familiar systems. An example is the fine structure of second-order logic (cf. [39]). Letting the comparison orderbe inclusion of predicates over the same domain, and switching to standard notation, truth of a circumscriptive sequentϕ ⇒P C with ϕ a conjunction of premises (where the predicate P may occur in both ϕ and C ) in a first-order model M istruth of a following second-order implication:(cid:6) ⊂ P : ϕϕ(P ) ∧ ¬∃P→ C(P ).(cid:3)(cid:3)P(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:6)Here the antecedent defines the ‘predicate minimal’ models of ϕ(P ).Thus, circumscription involves second-order logic, and high complexity is lurking. Still, basic results in [15] found specialsyntactic forms of ϕ(P ) that reduce circumscription to first-order reasoning.2 This line of analysis can be extended. [34] an-alyzes just when there exists a unique minimal predicate MIN P • ϕ(P ) satisfying a given first-order description ϕ(P ) (ϕmay also contain predicates Q that are not minimized):Definition 1. A first-order formula ϕ(P , Q ) has the Intersection Property for a predicate letter P if, in every model M ,whenever M, P i |(cid:9) ϕ(P , Q ) holds for all predicates in some family { P i | i ∈ I} (here the predicate letter P gets interpretedas the predicate P i ), then it also holds for the intersection of all these predicates, that is: M, ∩ P i |(cid:9) ϕ(P , Q ).If the formula ϕ(P , Q ) is satisfied in a model M by any predicate P at all, this ensures there is a unique smallestpredicate in M that does: and that is the earlier MIN P • ϕ(P ). A simple formula with the Intersection Property is ∀x(Q x →P x): the minimal predicate for P is just Q . A more complex example is ∀x(Q x → P x) ∧ ∀xy((P x ∧ Rxy) → P y): the minimalpredicate is the reflexive–transitive R-closure of Q in the model. These two cases suggest a syntactic format matching thesemantic Intersection Property:Definition 2. A first-order formula is a PIA form (‘positive antecedent implies atom’) if it has the syntactic format (with x afinite tuple of variables)(cid:2)∀x(cid:3)ϕ(P , Q , x) → P xwith P occurring only positively in ϕ(P , Q , x).Here is a model-theoretic preservation result connecting the two notions:Theorem 1. (See van Benthem [34].) The following assertions are equivalent for all first-order formulas ψ(P , Q ):(a) ψ(P , Q ) has the Intersection Property w.r.t. predicate P ,(b) ψ(P , Q ) is definable by a conjunction of PIA formulas.This analysis relates circumscription to well-known languages in the study of computation, with operators for smallestand greatest fixed-points:Theorem 2. (See van Benthem [34].) First-order logic with added predicate minimization over PIA-conditions has the same expressivepower as LFP(FO): first-order logic with added least fixed-point operators.1 This is much as in the Lewis semantics for conditional logic since around 1970 – an analogy which has been often noted (cf. [30]). This analogy willreturn below.2 The latter are reminiscent of ‘correspondence theory’ in modal logic [39] where we ask when modal logics whose axioms express second-order condi-tions on binary relations are already completely captured by matching first-order properties.430J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439The connection between circumscription and fixed-point logic seems worth developing, but this technical strand is notmy main theme in this paper.Further travels of the idea. The next noticeable phenomenon is that circumscription, like all good ideas, has crossed overto other areas, in maybe unintended ways. Non-monotonic default reasoning is important in philosophy. [30] notes howphilosophers of science in the 1950s were quite close to it in their accounts of scientific explanation as what follows froma theory ‘under normal circumstances’.3 A more detailed account is found in [35].Circumscription made its way into linguistics as well. [30] noted also how it accounts for ‘exhaustive readings’ of answersto questions. An answer “John and Mary” to a question “Who are walking?” is usually read minimally: only John and Maryare walking. Such predicate minimizations are elaborated in [43]: the art is then finding the right model order to minimizeover for concrete semantic purposes. There is also work on linguistic formulations for McCarthy’s common sense puzzles.The innovative [12] analyzed these as a source of cues directing reasoning toward a solution.The complete travels of circumscription and related ideas remain to be chronicled, and they would also include cognitivescience and mathematics. Instead, we turn to the more general impact of circumscription in views of logic itself.The Bolzano Program: logic as a study of the varieties of consequence. By now, many styles of non-classical consequence havebeen found, with their structural properties [6,8,24], and it has been suggested that logic itself should be viewed as a studyof a plurality of consequence relations. Indeed, there is a historical precedent, if we go back to the agenda before Fregeand Boole. Logic was defined as the study of different natural styles of reasoning in the work of the great pioneer BernardBolzano, who already provided a highly original theory of sub-structural properties [29,32].But this diversity of reasoning styles also raises quite a few problems of its own. What is the nature of this diversity: dowe really ‘infer’ in many different ways, and why? Can we safely combine different styles in useful ways? And if these stylesare to reflect cognitive practice or common sense, what about their computational complexity? Over a first-order language,circumscription has a much more complex notion of validity than classical consequence, so what total package of benefitsare we buying at this price?I have no answers to such questions of reasoning architecture. But in what follows, I suggest that a shift in perspectivemay be helpful – from a steaming jungle of non-classical ‘consequence relations’ to the world of modal logics for beliefrevision and other informational processes.Rethinking the issues: problem solving involves knowledge and belief. Recall the scenarios that motivated non-monotonic logicin the first place. We are given some initial information – and solving a puzzle means finding out what the true situationis. We may also get further information on the way. Perhaps the central phenomenon here is not inference at all, but ourprocessing of that initial information, and its subsequent updates:Say we are playing a card game, with the table in public view. At each stage, I know things about the outcome of thegame, while I believe more than what I strictly know, based on expectations about cards that other players hold, or theirtemperaments: timid, bluffing,. . . . Now, new information comes in, say you play a card on the table. This changes mycurrent state: I know more now, and my observation may also induce further beliefs about cards you are still holding. Ofcourse, these beliefs may be refuted by your further moves, unlike the hard knowledge that I got about what is on theboard. Solving puzzles, playing games, or planning in action seems all about such events.Now, I claim it is illuminating to think about classical versus circumscriptive ‘inference’ in the same way. The verymotivation for non-monotonic reasoning seems epistemic, having to do with managing our knowledge and beliefs – but thiskey feature is left implicit. To me, even classical consequence is really about the knowledge update that takes place when newinformation comes in. And in tandem with this, I would say thatcircumscriptive inference is about belief formationthat takes place on the basis of incoming new information.4 Clearly, knowledge update and belief revision are intertwined,and they provide mutual support. I think it is this diversity of responses to information that truly explains the moderngalaxies of notions of consequence. But if so, what should be our preferred logical analysis for these phenomena?Logical Dynamics. Informational events like the above are the arena of current dynamic logics of information update andbelief revision. The program behind such systems is ‘Logical Dynamics’ [31] that makes cognitive actions and events keythemes in logic. This makes systematic changes in what agents know, believe, or prefer the engine of ‘intelligent interaction’.This new focus leads to a re-analysis of what we studied earlier. We start with existing ‘static’ logics of knowledge andbelief, and then create ‘dynamified’ versions. Then we discuss what they tell us about circumscription.From static to dynamic epistemic logic. The epistemic base language has operators K iϕ for ‘agent i knows that ϕ’, inter-preted over models M = (W , {R i}i∈I , V ) where W is a set of relevant situations containing the actual world, the R i areepistemic accessibility relations among the worlds for agents, and V is a valuation assigning (possibly varying) truth valuesto proposition letters in each world. The key semantic clause is then this:M, s |(cid:9) K iϕ iff M, t |(cid:9) ϕ for all t with R i st.3 Domain-minimizing circumscription occurs explicitly as early as [10].4 ‘Belief’ should not be taken in any deep sense here: I just mean the temporary views we entertain as most plausible given our information so far.J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439431In what follows, we will write (cid:13)K (cid:14)ϕ for the existential dual of this notion. Epistemic models M define agents’ currentrange of uncertainty, i.e., they represent group information states in an obvious folklore sense. An agent ‘knows’ in thisinformational sense whatever is true at all worlds in her current range. We refer to the abundant literature for details ofthese systems (cf. [7]).These ranges come with another commonsense idea: new information decreases the current range, while full informationis just the singleton set {w} with w the actual world. The paradigmatic events that make this happen are public announce-ments !P of new ‘hard information’ that P is the case, which change irrevocably what agents know by elimination of allworlds that fail to satisfy P . Formally, a public announcement (or equally well, a public observation) !P triggers a changein the current epistemic model (M, s) with actual world s: it eliminates all worlds in M that are incompatible with P ,zooming in on the actual situation. Thus (M, s) changes into its definable sub-model (M|P , s), whose domain is the set{t ∈ M | M, t |(cid:9) P }. In a picture, one goesIn line with the informational interpretation, we assume that public announcements are made only of facts that aretrue.5 Truth values of formulas may change in this update process: in particular, with factual assertions, agents who did notknow P do after the event !P . This switching can be complex, but the following logic keeps track of it:Definition 3. The language of public announcement logic PAL extends epistemic logic with action expressions denoting thepreceding update steps:FormulasAction expressions A:!P .P : p | ¬ϕ | ϕ ∨ ψ | K iϕ | C Gϕ | [ A]ϕ.Here the basic new action modality [ A]ϕ comes from dynamic logic of programs, and it says that ‘after action A hasbeen performed at the current world, ϕ has become the case’. The precise semantic clause for this dynamic action modalityis as follows, with the antecedent reflecting the partiality of the model change operation (its precondition is that P be true):M, s |(cid:9) [!P ]ϕ iffif M, s |(cid:9) P ,then M|P , s |(cid:9) ϕ.We refer to [42] for a textbook exposition of PAL and much richer systems of ‘dynamic epistemic logic’. Here is thecomplete logical calculus of ‘hard information flow’ in the above sense [22,9,41]:Theorem 3. PAL is axiomatized completely by the usual complete laws of epistemic logic for the chosen model class6 plus the followingrecursion axioms:↔ P → q for atomic facts q,[!P ]q↔ P → ¬[!P ]ϕ,[!P ]¬ϕ[!P ](ϕ ∧ ψ) ↔ [!P ]ϕ ∧ [!P ]ψ,[!P ]K iϕ[!P ]C GϕP → [!P ]ϕ[!P ]ϕ.↔ P → K i↔ P → C PG(cid:2)(cid:3),We give some informal explanation. The antecedents P express the earlier-mentioned partiality of the operation !P .The first axiom says that announcements do not change atomic facts. The second axiom interchanges the modality andnegation, something that holds for a modal operator when its accessibility relation is a partial function: and indeed, !P is.The knowledge recursion axiom replaces knowledge after announcement by conditional knowledge before, taking propercare of the right recursion. Finally, for completeness, we added the recursion axiom for C G ϕ: common knowledge of ϕ ingroup G, whose semantics we omit here. C PG ϕ is then the matching ‘conditionalized version’ of common knowledge (cf.[41]).7These axioms are the ‘recursion equations’ of public information flow, performing step-by-step analysis of epistemiceffects of incoming hard information. In particular, they relate knowledge that agents get after getting new information to5 We can easily deal with more general announcement scenarios, all the way up to unreliability, lying and cheating, but they would lead us too far here.6 This logic can be S4, S5 or KD45: it does not matter for the dynamic analysis.7 [41] define P-conditional common knowledge as common knowledge with accessibilities restricted to finite paths consisting entirely of P -worlds, andP ∧[!P ]ψGprovide the full-blown complete recursion axiom for it: [!P ]CψG ϕ ↔ (P → Cϕ[!P ]ϕ).432J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439conditional knowledge they already had before. There is much more to this system, but for the purposes of this paper, weknow enough.Dynamic consequence relations. One more thing is essential to our discussion of McCarthy’s work: the system PAL supportsnew notions of consequence!Definition 4. A sequent P 1, . . . , P k ⇒ ϕ is dynamically valid if, starting with any epistemic model (M, s) whatsoever, succes-sive announcements of the premises result in a final model where announcement of ϕ effects no further change: i.e., in themodel ((. . . (M|P 1) . . .)|P k, s) the formula ϕ was already true everywhere, even before it is announced.Dynamic validity amounts to PAL validity of the following dynamic–epistemic formula, which says that the conclusionbecomes common knowledge:[!P 1] . . . [!P k]C Gϕ.8On the surface, this seems close to classical consequence. Indeed, we have:Fact 1. For purely factual (non-epistemic) formulas P 1, . . . , P k, ϕ, dynamic valid consequence holds if and only if ϕ follows classicallyfrom P 1, . . . , P k.The special reason behind the fact is this: purely factual formulas do not change their truth values at worlds whenpassing from a model M to an updated model M|P . Things change when we admit announcements of epistemic formulas,because then, truth values can, and will, typically change, like when ignorance changes into knowledge.Structural rules. Now consider the famous structural rules governing classical logical consequence in a sequent formatP ⇒ C from premises to conclusion. These are Permutation of formulas in P , Contraction of occurrences of the same formulain P to just one, Monotonicity (adding antecedents to P ), Reflexivity (C ⇒ C ), and Cut ( P ⇒ C and Q , C ⇒ D imply thatP , Q ⇒ D). Prima facie, dynamic consequence loses all of these, since it treats premises as update instructions, whoseorder and multiplicity matter (cf. [31]):Fact 2. All classical structural rules fail for valid dynamic consequence.But once can find modified structural rules that do remain valid in this setting:Fact 3. Dynamic consequence satisfies the following structural rules:if P ⇒ C,then A, P ⇒ Cif P ⇒ A and P , A, Q ⇒ C,if P ⇒ A and P , Q ⇒ C,then P , Q ⇒ Cthen P , A, Q ⇒ C(Left-Monotonicity),(Left-Cut),(Cautious Monotonicity).Theorem 4. (See van Benthem [33].) A sequent σ is derivable from a set of sequents X by means of the preceding three structural rulesiff σ is true in all models where all sequents in X are true.Altogether, this shows how dynamic logics of knowledge suggest new consequence relations. We now move to analogousphenomena for agents’ beliefs:From static to dynamic doxastic logic. Real agents jump to conclusions, form and drop beliefs, correcting themselves underthe influence of new information. Logics of belief analyze assertions B iϕ for ‘agent i believes that ϕ’. Their semantics addsgradations to the information ranges in epistemic models, using a ternary plausibility ordering of worlds x, y as seen fromsome vantage point s:(cid:2)i,s xy in world s, agent i considers x at least as plausible as y.We then define belief semantically as ‘truth in the most plausible options’:M, s |(cid:9) B iϕ iff M, t |(cid:9) ϕ for all minimal worlds t in the order λxy. (cid:2)i,s xy.8 For a single S5-agent, we can replace C G ϕ by just knowledge: K ϕ.J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439433Example 1. Consider the following model with two mutually epistemically accessible worlds, but the one with ¬P is moreplausible than the other:At the actual world to the right, with P , the agent does not know whether P , but she does (mistakenly!) believe that¬P . Crucially, beliefs can be false.Now one soon finds that absolute beliefs are not sufficient for explaining agents’ behavior. We want to know what theywould believe were they to receive new information. This pre-encoding, in our earlier sense, requires conditional belief:M, s |(cid:9) Bψi ϕ iff M, t |(cid:9) ϕ for all worlds t that are maximal for λxy. (cid:2)i,s xy in the set {u | M, u |(cid:9) ψ}.Conditional beliefs Bunder different circumstances.ψi ϕ say that i believes ϕ, given that ψ . This is like conditionals [14]: they express what might happenNow, the earlier events of public hard information also affect agents’ beliefs:Theorem 5. (See van Benthem [37].) The complete logic of conditional belief under public announcements is axiomatized by (a) anycomplete static logic for knowledge and belief, (b) PAL reduction axioms for atomic facts and Boolean operations, and (c) a new recursionaxiom for conditional belief :(cid:2)[!P ]Bψi ϕ ↔P → BP ∧[!P ]ψi[!P ]ϕ(cid:3).A special case is formation of absolute beliefs: [!P ]B iϕ ↔ (P → B Pi[!P ]ϕ).Dynamic consequence subsumes circumscriptive inference. Now, just as with information update and knowledge, the dynamicsetting of belief change suggests a new notion of consequence:[!P 1] . . . [!P k]Bϕ.That is, when updated with the information in the successive premises, the agent will come to believe the conclusion.9Now the point to observe is that this notion generalizes the earlier-mentioned most general version of circumscriptionminimizing over arbitrary pre-orders, as truth of the conclusion in all minimal models of the premises10:P 1, . . . , P k ⇒ ϕ.Given our semantics of belief, with the plausibility order now the obvious candidate for minimization, and working withfactual propositions only, that do not change their truth values across model updates from M to M|P , [!P 1] . . . [!P k]Bϕ saysexactly the same as truth in all minimal models of the premises. Thus, we have the following informalClaim 1. Our dynamic logic specialized to belief formation under incoming factual propositions describes everything circumscriptionwas designed to do!This is of course a conceptual claim, not a mathematical theorem. But it is a serious proposal: if we analyze problemsolving in terms of belief formation and belief change, then circumscription becomes a special case of the appropriate logicalnotion of dynamic consequence.In fact, the latter notion even does more. Our full dynamic logic also admits complex non-factual propositions forpremises and conclusions, that express agents knowledge and beliefs. The usual accounts of structural rules and the in-tuitions associated with circumscription do not seem to take such more sophisticated information into account at all. Butthe above calculus does, and it will keep all this extra structure absolutely straight.Belief change under soft information. But there is more. In using circumscription, one often fixes one comparison relationbetween models, that does not change in the process of inference. In abstract non-monotonic logics, this choice is left im-plicit in context. But since comparing worlds by relative plausibility determines agents’ beliefs, and hence their ‘conclusions’,it is important to have explicit control over how we choose, and change that ordering. Indeed, triggers for changing beliefsneed not be ‘hard information’ of the public announcement type, ruling out certain worlds for good. They can rather be‘soft information’ affecting just our plausibility ordering of the worlds.9 With groups of agents, we would require common belief.10 We forego the usual technical complications with suitably modified definitions on non-well-founded orderings here, as these will be very similar forboth dynamic consequence and circumscription.434J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439An event that makes us believe that P need only rearrange worlds making the most plausible ones P : it works by‘promotion’ rather than elimination of worlds. Thus, on the earlier models M = (W , ∼i, (cid:2)i, V ), we change the relations (cid:2)i ,rather than the domain of worlds W or epistemic accessibilities ∼i .Here is a well-known soft trigger from the area of belief revision, sometimes called ‘radical revision’. A lexicographicupgrade ⇑ P is an instruction for changing the current ordering relation (cid:2) between worlds as follows:all P -worlds in the current model become better than all ¬P -worlds,while, within those two zones, the old plausibility ordering remains.We have the following corresponding dynamic modalityM, s |(cid:9) [⇑ P ]ϕ iff M ⇑ P , s |(cid:9) ϕwith M ⇑ P the model M with its order (cid:2) changed as above. This dynamic doxastic language describes how beliefs changeunder soft information:Theorem 6. (See van Benthem [37].) The dynamic logic of lexicographic upgrade is axiomatized completely by (a) any complete axiomsystem for conditional belief on the static models, plus (b) the following recursion axioms:for atomic facts q,↔ P → q,↔ P → ¬[⇑ P ]ϕ,[⇑ P ]q[ ⇑ P ]¬ϕ[ ⇑ P ](ϕ ∧ ψ) ↔ [⇑ P ]ϕ ∧ [⇑ P ]ψ,(cid:3)[ ⇑ P ]Bψ ϕ(cid:2)(cid:2)↔(cid:2)P ∧ [⇑ P ]ψ(cid:2)(cid:2)¬(cid:2)∨P ∧ [⇑ P ]ψ∧ B P ∧[⇑P ]ψ [⇑ P ]ϕ∧ B[⇑P ]ψ [⇑ P ]ϕ(cid:3)(cid:3).(cid:3)The crucial final equivalence states which conditional beliefs agents form after soft upgrade. (Here (cid:2) is the earlierepistemic existential modality (cid:13)K (cid:14).) This formula may look daunting, but try to read the principles of some non-monotonicdefault logics existing today! And there is a reward. We now see explicitly how new triggers affect the plausibility order(cid:2) among worlds, and hence our beliefs at any given stage, and thus, the ‘non-monotonic inferences’ available to us on thebasis of the ambient order (cid:2).11New circumscriptive consequence relations. Given these options in belief revision and plausibility change, which is the trueanalogue of a circumscriptive inference P ⇒ ϕ in this dynamic setting? In particular, are the premises ‘fed in’ as hard orsoft information? We cannot tell once and for all, because we now live in a richer universe of informational events thatmay determine how we solve our problem, make our plan, or play our game. Indeed, here is what seems a new notion ofcircumscriptive consequence:In addition to ‘hard circumscription’ [!P 1] . . . [!P k]Bϕconsider also ‘soft circumscription’ [⇑ P 1] . . . [⇑ P k]Bϕ.Definition 5. A soft circumscriptive inference P ⇒circ-soft C is valid when, in every model, after performing radical upgradesfor all successive premises in P , the conclusion C holds in the model obtained in this way.The two options are not the same [38]:Fact 4. For factual assertions P , Q : (i) P , Q ⇒circ-hard P , (ii) not P , Q ⇒circ-soft P .The reason for (i) is that successive hard updates always yield subsets of the P -worlds. The reason for (ii) is that the lastupgrade with Q may have demoted all P -worlds from their former top positions.These generalized notions of circumscription are axiomatized by our dynamic logics of belief change. Still, an openproblem of detail remains:What are the complete structural rules for both hard and soft circumscription?11 There are many further ways of taking soft information. Conservative belief revision puts not all P -worlds on top qua plausibility, but just the mostplausible P-worlds. ‘After the revolution’, this policy co-opts just the leaders of the under-class, not all of them. Complete dynamic logics for these and otherpolicies exist [37,4].J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–4394352.2. ConclusionThe intuitions behind circumscriptive inference are epistemic, involving knowledge and belief. They are also dynamic,involving agents’ responses to incoming information. Circumscription and other styles of non-monotonic reasoning are atheart about cognitive attitudes and responses to information. This was made explicit in dynamic logics that make processesof inference and self-correction go hand in hand. Moreover, the events driving such processes can be quite diverse, from hardinformation update eliminating worlds to soft mechanisms of plausibility change in world order. Thus, the circumscriptivereasoner, or her theorist, gets a framework describing problem solving in a much richer way than just choosing between afew reasoning styles.Here are some other noteworthy features. Our analysis does away with ‘deviant’ notions of consequence. The abovesystems implement an ‘equation’:non-standard consequence is classical consequence plus dynamics,with the latter being an explicit account of knowledge and belief-changing events. And the mechanisms for the dynamicshave an independent interest. They perform what may be called ‘model management’, keeping our current models attunedto information received, and in particular, dynamically adjusting the minimality ordering that was so crucial to circumscrip-tion. Thus, we can also formulate intuitions concerning that ordering at a dynamic level. For instance, on an Ockhamiststance, we would only add individual objects or worlds when really forced by the incoming informational events.Our perspective raises new open problems, such as capturing the structural properties of softer variants of circum-scription. Also, it raises issues of over-all architecture of reasoning. Dynamic notions of consequence care for details ofpresentation of premises and conclusions, reflecting the history of matching informational events. There may be different‘scales’ here, since these seem local effects, forgotten in the longer term. Indeed, circumscription itself already seems morelocal than classical consequence, since we use the current context of presentation for premises (‘just these right now, nomore’). Our dynamic notions go one step further in this local direction. Thus, there may be a place for different notions ofconsequence, and short-term and long-term dynamics.Viewed in this way, the study of circumscription and similar non-monotonic reasoning styles and the study of dynamicmodal logics of knowledge and belief are after the same things. They may compete, but also, help each other.3. From Situation Calculus to epistemic temporal logicClassical logic and circumscription describe single steps of inference. The next step in studying agency is the longer term,where many such steps combine into problem solving procedures and behavior over time. In this realm, many frameworkscompete: Dynamic Logic, Temporal Logic, and so on – often without communication. All work with more or less the samestructures, viz. branching trees of events, possibly endowed with epistemic structure.12This temporal realm is where John McCarthy has made another fundamental contribution, viz. his Situation Calculus,developed in [17,19].13My initial plan for this paper was a crisp comparison between Situation Calculus and my own habitat of Modal Logic(see [5] for the current state of the art).14 But two things made me change my mind. One was a convergence of approachesthat had already happened without my knowing it. When opening Reiter’s Knowledge in Action from 2001 [23], I was struckby great similarities. The very title sounds like ‘Language in Action’ and ‘Logic in Action’, fashionable book titles in myworld since the early 1990s. More concretely, models of the Situation Calculus are branching trees of event sequences, thestandard semantics of all process theories of rational action [40], major methods like ‘Regression’ are standard compositionaltechniques for computing preconditions of events, knowledge is treated in a standard philosophical epistemic style (cf. [7]),and the logic programming underpinning of specific scenarios is a general resource that we all use.15 Thus the modernSituation Calculus seems to be part of the air that we all breathe.Next I wanted to look at fine-structure, comparing Situation Calculus techniques in detail with those used in modal logic.In particular, striking analogies exist between the ‘regression calculus’ and the dynamic logics of Section 2. But I was justtoo late. Many points in my first draft were found independently in [11]. I will therefore just give a brief discussion here,starting from a generalization of the dynamic logics in Section 2.12 [40] show how this structure occurs across AI, computer science, linguistics, and philosophy, while the temporal logics and technical results about themare in close harmony, even when developed independently. [37] provide comparisons and merges between the frameworks of dynamic epistemic logic andepistemic temporal logic.13 In what follows, we will refer to the formulations given in [23] – while related temporal frameworks are found in [28,25,27].14 One special reason was that John himself sometimes grumbles about modal logicians persisting in their evil ways, ignoring what he sees as his knock-down arguments against their approach.15 To avoid misunderstanding here, I am not saying that Reiter’s book contains nothing new. To the contrary, I was deeply impressed by its content, and Istand by what I said on its cover!436J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–4393.1. Dynamic epistemic logics of time and changeEvents and general dynamic epistemic logic. The dynamic logics of information change in Section 2 have general event-based versions where update is more sophisticated than mere elimination of worlds, or rearranging plausibility order [3,36].General observation of events involves two ingredients:(a) a current epistemic information model M as above, plus,(b) an epistemic event model E of all relevant possible events,with accessibility relations in E representing what agents know about these events, their ‘epistemic access’. Say, in a cardgame, playing cards on the table is a publicly observable event, but in drawing a card from the stack, I see the card I amdrawing, but you only know it is one of a certain set. Also, you and I may have different beliefs. Perhaps my smile meansthat I am drawing the Ace of Hearts, but you cannot know this.Formally, an event model E is a triple (E, {∼i}i∈I , PRE) with E the set of relevant events, indistinguishability relations∼i describing which events agent i cannot (observationally) distinguish in the scenario described by E , and a preconditionfunction PRE assigning to each event e a precondition PREe for its occurrence, expressed as a formula of epistemic logic.16In this setting, information flows through observation since events e come with preconditions PREe on their successfulexecution. A truthful public announcement P ! can only happen in P -worlds, I can only draw the Ace of Hearts if it isactually on the stack, etc. This information flow gets implemented in the following update mechanism:Definition 6 (Product update). Dynamic epistemic update takes an epistemic model M and an event model E to aproduct model M × E with domain(cid:4)(cid:5)(s, e) | M, s |(cid:9) PRE(e).Here a pair (s, e) records a new event e occurring at the old world s, provided that the preconditions of e held at M , s (thelatter restriction may change the total space of options). The basic epistemic idea of information flow is now as follows.Uncertainty among new worlds can only come from existing uncertainty via indistinguishable events:(s, e) ∼i (t, f )iff both s ∼i t and e ∼i f .17The valuation for proposition letters at (s, e) just remains that of s.This framework for knowledge update can also be extended to deal with beliefs and belief change, providing a generalizationfor all of Section 2 above (cf. [4,37]). It can also deal with actual world change through physical events (cf. [41]). In thelatter set-up, events e in an event model E are specified using both ‘pre-’ and ‘post-conditions’, similar to those used in theSituation Calculus.18Dynamic epistemic logics. Again there are complete dynamic languages and matching logics governing this style of update(cf. [41]). As in Section 2, their core consists of recursion axioms analyzing epistemic, doxastic, and physical effects of events,with the earlier operators [!P ]ϕ generalized to forms [E, e]K iϕ, [E, e]B iϕ, etc. These are somewhat adventurous, as theyput epistemic event models inside the language, but this can be done consistently.Again, the crucial recursion uses the ability of our static logical languages to pre-encode what would become true aftercertain events. For instance, here is the central recursion axiom for the case of knowledge (note the role of the preconditionfor the event e):[E, e]K iϕ ↔ PREe →K iPRE f → [E, f ]ϕ(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:7)(cid:7) f ∼i e in E(cid:5).Dynamic epistemic logic in this style may be viewed as a well-chosen fragment of the richer epistemic temporal logics of[7,21]. But the latter also describe longer-term environments of events, into the future and the past.3.2. A striking encounter: regression principles are recursion axiomsWe will just sketch one striking convergence with the Situation Calculus. Consider the central Regression Method in [23]for ‘pre-computing’ the effects of a plan, or a structured program, at the initial stage of a process. Here are some basicnotions in this setting.Possibility predicates. First, when describing events e, we often know explicitly when they can occur, and the ‘possibilitypredicates’ Poss(e) in the Situation Calculus are just the above preconditions. In modal terms, this uses formulas(cid:13)e(cid:14)(cid:19) ↔ ϕ(e), where ϕ is a formula referring to the current state only.1916 This format of definition can be extended, but it will do for an illustration.17 Actually, this clause amounts to an assumption of agents having ‘Perfect Recall’ [41] similar to those discussed in [7,23], or in game theory [20].18 It is tempting to identify events with the same pre- and postconditions, but in the presence of different epistemic agents, this is impossible – just aswe cannot identify worlds with the same factual content in multi-agent settings.J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439437Successor state axioms. Next, we often specify effects of events via conditions on the current state. My lighting the matchwill make the cigarette burn (a post-condition) iff certain preconditions hold.‘Successor state axioms’ in the SituationCalculus describe when an event produces a state satisfying a certain atomic predicate in terms of some local conditionon the current state. Again, the pattern is familiar from modal logic. Successor state axioms are like preconditions (cid:13)π (cid:14)ϕ ofdynamic logics of programs, where the existential modality says that ϕ will hold after some successful execution of theprogram π . For specific events, the reduction principle takes the following form(cid:13)e(cid:14)ψ ↔ Ψ (e), where Ψ is a formula referring to the current state only.20Program structure. On top of these basic events, plans have complex structure, that can be reduced via the usual principlesof dynamic logic, such as the axiom for action composition:(cid:13)π1; π2(cid:14)ϕ ↔ (cid:13)π1(cid:14)(cid:13)π2(cid:14)ϕ.Object recursion axioms. Finally, and this goes beyond propositional dynamic logic, the Situation Calculus employs reductionaxioms for existential quantifiers over domains of objects. E.g., the following ‘Barcan Axiom’ from modal predicate logic willhold, provided that the event does not change the domain by actions of destruction or creation:(cid:13)e(cid:14)∃xϕ ↔ ∃x(cid:13)e(cid:14)ϕ.The Regression Theorem. Now, arguably the central result in [23] (where it occurs in both factual and epistemic versions)is the Regression Theorem. It says essentially that one can pre-compute in the current state when some given complex eventor plan has certain specified effects following its execution. The key point is this, when stated in the above modal terms.Given preconditions for events and their atomic effects, all further constructions for complex effects can be pushed recursivelythrough the event modality. This is even an effective method for analyzing plans.But all this was exactly the point of our method of recursion axioms and ‘pre-encoding’ in Sections 2 and 3.1. Thus,Situation Calculus and Dynamic Epistemic Logic exploit essentially the same natural features of events, and of how weunderstand them in terms of information flow and physical changes. Of course, there are differences in style – but perhapsunbeknownst to each other, they have found similar solutions to similar problems.Adding knowledge. Further analogies reinforce this point. The original Situation Calculus has no explicit account of knowl-edge. But [23] does have one, based on the extension of regression in the Situation Calculus to knowledge first given in [26].Once this epistemic structure is added to the temporal universe, the discussions of knowledge and informative events in [23]are virtually identical to those found in [7], or the dynamic–epistemic literature. Indeed, the very treatment of knowledgeis that of standard epistemic logic, be it in a rich language that also describes accessibility relations directly.21In particular, Reiter’s thoughtful discussion of regression axioms for information after events makes a point that is alsocentral to dynamic–epistemic logic. Recursion axioms for knowledge after events like the ones stated in Section 2 are notneutral: they presuppose a special kind of agency. In particular, they encode two major epistemic presuppositions aboutagents [7,40]. One is Perfect Recall: future uncertainties only arise out of past uncertainties plus uncertainty introducedby partial observation – there are no memory lapses. The other major presupposition is No Miracles: current uncertaintybetween worlds persists, unless it is resolved by some newly observed event.223.3. ConclusionThe Situation Calculus seems to have evolved to a pretty standard epistemic-temporal framework, of which many variantsexist in many areas. In particular, it uses recursive machinery that has been proposed independently in dynamic epistemiclogics. Thus, we can profitably compare, and perhaps even merge frameworks. A concrete example is computational com-plexity. We know a lot about the complexity of dynamic–epistemic logics over their static base logics (cf. [16,11]), andaccordingly, we can learn a lot about the design of well-chosen fragments of the full Situation Calculus.4. General methodological issuesWe have found striking similarities between McCarthy’s World and the modus operandi of (modal) logicians. In thissection, we list a few methodological differences, at least in emphasis. These are worth-while, too, as ‘intensional differences’are often instructive.‘Logical systems’ versus doing the actual work. One difficulty in making comparisons is that ‘Logical AI’ is about systemsthat really describe some reasoning practice in detail, while many logicians live in a world of formal systems whose uses19 In Reiter’s language, these predicates can still involve individual terms, and lush higher-order languages, far beyond the usual austere modal formalisms– but we will discuss that difference in Section 4 below.20 For the Situation Calculus, where events are usually deterministic, the difference with the universal modal [π ]ϕ in dynamic logic is slight.21 This itself is the familiar ‘Tandem Approach’ beloved by working modal logicians: cf. the chapter ‘Modal Logic: A Semantic Perspective’ in [5].22 For further productive analogies between the two traditions, cf. [13].438J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–439are largely fictional, or at least, confined to scoring points in internal discussions with other designers of formal systems.But Circumscription or Situation Calculus are not just core theories in the logician’s sense, as a set of formal definitions plusmathematical meta-theorems. They are also bodies of practice, including sophisticated exemplars of reasoning with hierar-chies of classificatory ‘abnormality predicates’, temporal ‘inertia predicates’, and the like. By contrast, dynamic epistemiclogics so far have just a modest ‘modeling practice’: a historically growing fund of successful applications that serve asexemplars for new researchers. Another practical aspect is computational implementation. For instance, whether you arebothered by computational complexity is like sensitivity to sin: some people have it, some do not. This paper has providedno framework comparison at these broader practical levels.Modal logic and fine-structure. A second difference is the role of formalism. In logic, formal languages make conceptsexplicit and computationally manipulable, trying to model major aspects of some reasoning practice. A crucial aspect inthis perspective is their expressive poverty. First-order logic itself is a small fragment of Frege’s higher-order logic, proposedby Hilbert & Ackermann, which strikes a special balance between two desiderata: expressive power, and low complexity ofvalidity – the valid first-order inferences are effectively axiomatizable. The same concern with fine-structure drives modallogic, which weakens the expressive power of first-order logic still further, in return for even decidability of valid inference.Given this stance, a logician might say that the complexity in Logical AI comes from mixing two strands. One are coreprinciples of non-monotonic or temporal reasoning, the other are effects of working with particular classes of models orderedby concrete relations of comparison and temporal succession. That this mixture of logic and ‘mathematics’ is highly complexgoes without saying.Bringing these perspectives together seems worthwhile. Logicians keep finding new fragments that strike a good balancebetween expressive power for key patterns of reasoning and complexity of validity. One new decidable system in betweenmodal and first-order logic is the Guarded Fragment [2], and it would be of interest to see how much of existing Logical AIcan work with guarded (re-)formulations.23 Experience from modal logic might help ‘deconstruct’ highly complex systemsand provide illuminating fine-structure. And if you find this motivation too internal-logical, think of this: less expressivelanguages represent higher levels of abstraction, and we all know the advantages of that!First-order and the proper level of generality. John McCarthy has sometimes engaged in polemics against modal logic. I willnot be drawn into this arena, partly because my own work on modal correspondence theory has always advocated a tandemapproach of studying modal languages jointly with translations into classical ones, first- or higher-order. But there is oneinteresting issue where John’s criticisms resonate with me. It can be described in several ways. One is that propositionalmodal logics may be missing generality. Even though one can encode information flow in given modal models, such so-lutions often miss the genericity of first-order formulations, that work across many models at once. Thus, it is always ofinterest to also look upward in expressive power, toward languages that bring out the generic nature of solutions in a mostperspicuous manner. This issue is related to what I have called the ‘system imprisonment’ of modern logic. We are boundby our methodology to defining specific formal systems, and these may not be the most appropriate vehicle for statingour general insights. Consider the recursion axioms of dynamic–epistemic logic, and compare them to Reiter’s regressioncalculus. Clearly, the recursion method is not tied at all to the modal language, but one might forget this generality whenstaying ‘down below’.24Richer Ontology. Of course, there is also a less methodological and more practical reason for moving up in expressivepower. The Situation Calculus has structured objects all around: events have agents and objects, agents know people andtheir telephone numbers, etc. In line with this, formal languages in Logical AI are usually based on at least predicate logicwith atomic predicates, variables, terms that cross between objects and predicates, and other ways of describing individualobjects and their properties and interrelations. This, too, should appeal to modal logicians. Dynamic epistemic logics andepistemic temporal logics extol the importance of events, but they are silent on the structure of these crucial entities. Incontrast, theories of events in formal semantics endow them with a lot of structure, including agents, objects, patients,locations, modes, etc. Agents knowing objects and persons, in addition to propositions, were crucial to epistemic logic asoriginally developed in philosophy. The agenda shift in modal logic taking this richer object structure to the margin ofresearch can be questioned. Well, nothing was lost for good. Each preceding item presents a challenge to people in myworld, viz. the design of richer and more generic versions of dynamic epistemic logic.2523 In constructive mathematics, much attention has been paid to the actual minimal expressive power needed to formalize bodies of mathematical proof.Why not do the same for common sense reasoning?24 Still, the real issue with our methodology for information and belief may not be total system complexity, but relative complexity of a dynamic logicover its static base.25 Occasionally, McCarthy’s insistence on first-order logic also has a ‘downward-looking’ flavor. In his view of common knowledge, groups are just newfirst-order objects, where modal logicians move to non-first-order fixed-point logics for group knowledge and related phenomena. I find McCarthy’s al-ternative interesting, and indeed, one can analyze fixed-point axioms for epistemic logic with common knowledge in first-order terms by modal framecorrespondence techniques.J. van Benthem / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 428–4394395. ConclusionJohn McCarthy’s world and that of modal logic seem highly congenial, though not quite the same. I hope to have shownwith concrete examples that this allows for meaningful communication, and through that, fruitful forms of agreement anddisagreement. And even if our life-styles do not merge completely in this encounter, creative friction is the engine ofscientific progress.AcknowledgementsSeveral colleagues provided useful comments. Especially, I thank Hans van Ditmarsch and Andreas Herzig, Garhard Lake-meyer, as well as the editors of this volume, and in addition, at least three anonymous referees.References[1] P. Adriaans, J. van Benthem (Eds.), Handbook of the Philosophy of Information, North-Holland, 2008.[2] H. Andreka, J. van Benthem, I. Nemeti, Modal logics and bounded fragments of predicate logic, Journal of Philosophical Logic 27 (3) (1998) 217–274.[3] A. Baltag, L. Moss, S. Solecki, The logic of public announcements, common knowledge and private suspicions, in: Proceedings TARK 1998, MorganKaufmann Publishers, Los Altos, 1998, pp. 43–56.[4] A. Baltag, S. Smets, Dynamic belief revision over multi-agent plausibility models, in: Proc. LOFT, Computing Dep., Liverpool Univ. 2006.[5] P. Blackburn, J. van Benthem, F. Wolter (Eds.), Handbook of Modal Logic, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, 2006.[6] K. Dosen, P. Schroeder-Heister (Eds.), Substructural Logics, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993.[7] R. Fagin, J. Halpern, Y. Moses, M. Vardi, Reasoning About Knowledge, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995.[8] D. Gabbay, Labeled Deductive Systems, Oxford Univ. Press, 1996.[9] J. Gerbrandy, Bisimulations on Planet Kripke, Dissertation, ILLC, University of Amsterdam, 1999.[10] P. Hempel, Aspects of Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy of Science, The Free Press, New York, 1965.[11] A. Herzig, T. de Lima, H. van Ditmarsch, Optimal regression for reasoning about knowledge and actions, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-Second AAAIConference on Artificial Intelligence, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, July 22–26, 2007, AAAI Press, 2007, pp. 1070–1075.[12] M. Kameyama, Indefeasible semantics and defeasible pragmatics, Report CS-R9441, CWI, Amsterdam, 1995.[13] G. Lakemeyer, H. Levesque, A semantic characterization of a useful fragment of the situation calculus with knowledge, in: Proceedings of IJCAI 2006,Aachen & Toronto, 2006.[14] D. Lewis, Counterfactuals, Blackwell Publishers, 1973.[15] V. Lifschitz, Computing circumscription, in: Proceedings IJCAI-85, Los Angeles, 1985, pp. 121–127.[16] C. Lutz, Complexity and succinctness of public announcement logic, in: Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agentsand Multiagent Systems, Hakodate, Japan, 2006, pp. 137–143.[17] J. McCarthy, Situations, actions, and causal laws, Technical report, Stanford University, 1963. Reprinted in: M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic InformationProcessing, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1968, pp. 410–417.[18] J. McCarthy, Circumscription – a form of non-monotonic reasoning, Artificial Intelligence 13 (1980) 27–39.[19] J. McCarthy, P. Hayes, Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence, in: B. Meltzer, D. Michie (Eds.), Machine Intelligence,vol. 4, Edinburgh University Press, 1969, pp. 463–502.[20] M. Osborne, A. Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994.[21] R. Parikh, R. Ramanujam, A knowledge based semantics of messages, Journal of Logic, Language and Information 12 (4) (2003) 453–467.[22] J. Plaza, Logics of public communications, in: 4th International Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems, 1989, pp. 201–216.[23] R. Reiter, Knowledge in Action, Logical Foundations for Specifying and Implementing Dynamical Systems, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001.[24] G. Restall, An Introduction to Substructural Logics, Routledge, London, 2000.[25] E. Sandewall, Features and Fluents, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1994.[26] R. Scherl, H. Levesque, The frame problem and knowledge producing actions, in: Proceedings AAAI-93, Washington, DC, 1993, pp. 689–695.[27] M. Shanahan, A circumscriptive calculus of events, Artificial Intelligence 77 (1995) 249–287.[28] Y. Shoham, Reasoning About Change, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1988.[29] J. van Benthem, The variety of consequence, according to Bolzano, Studia Logica 44 (4) (1985) 389–403.[30] J. van Benthem, Semantic parallels in natural language and computation, in: H.-D. Ebbinghaus, et al. (Eds.), Logic Colloquium, Granada, 1987, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1989, pp. 331–375.[31] J. van Benthem, Exploring Logical Dynamics, CSLI, Stanford, 1996.[32] J. van Benthem, Is there still logic in Bolzano’s key?, in: E. Morscher (Ed.), Bernard Bolzano’s Leistungen in Logik, Mathematik und Physik, Band 16,Academia Verlag, Sankt Augustin, 2003, pp. 11–34.[33] J. van Benthem, Structural properties of dynamic reasoning, in: J. Peregrin (Ed.), Meaning: The Dynamic Turn, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2003, pp. 15–31.[34] J. van Benthem, Minimal predicates, fixed-points, and definability, Journal of Symbolic Logic 70 (3) (2005) 696–712.[35] J. van Benthem, Logic in philosophy, in: D. Jacquette (Ed.), Handbook of the Philosophy of Logic, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006.[36] J. van Benthem, One is a lonely number: on the logic of communication, in: Z. Chatzidakis, P. Koepke, W. Pohlers (Eds.), Logic Colloquium ’02, ASL &A.K. Peters, Wellesley, MA, 2006, pp. 96–129.[37] J. van Benthem, Dynamic logics of belief change, Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics 17 (2) (2007) 129–155.[38] J. van Benthem, Logical dynamics meets logical pluralism? Australasian Journal of Logic 6 (2008) 1–28.[39] J. van Benthem, K. Doets, Higher-order logic, in: D. Gabbay, F. Guenthner (Eds.), Handbook of Philosophical Logic, vol. I, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1983,pp. 275–329.[40] J. van Benthem, E. Pacuit, The tree of knowledge in action, in: Proceedings Advances in Modal Logic IV, Melbourne, 2006.[41] J. van Benthem, J. van Eijck, B. Kooi, Logics of communication and change, Information and Computation 204 (11) (2006) 620–1662.[42] H. van Ditmarsch, W. van der Hoek, B. Kooi, Dynamic Epistemic Logic, Springer, Dordrecht, 2007.[43] R. van Rooij, K. Schulz, Pragmatic meaning and non-monotonic reasoning: The case of exhaustive interpretation, Linguistics and Philosophy 29 (2006)205–250.