llOPEN ACCESSPerspectiveMemetics and neural models of conspiracy theoriesW1odzis1aw Duch1,*1Department of Informatics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics, and Neurocognitive Laboratory, Center for ModernInterdisciplinary Technologies, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Toru(cid:1)n, Poland*Correspondence: wduch@umk.plhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100353THE BIGGER PICTURE Conspiracy theories are widespread. So far, research in this area has been focusedon psychological, sociological, and political science perspectives. Brain processes facilitating formation ofconspiracy theories are largely unknown. In neural systems, a meme may be represented by a quasi-stableassociative memory network attractor state. Creation of memes with numerous fake associations distorts re-lations between stable memory states. Simulations of neural network models trained with competitiveHebbian learning (CHL) on stationary and non-stationary input data show the formation of distorted memorystates. In non-stationary situations, rapid learning with high plasticity followed by stepwise decrease of plas-ticity leads to many states with overlapping attraction basins, distorting patterns in associative memory.Such system-level models may be used to understand conditions under which memplexes with distortedmemory patterns arise, representing deeply settled conspiracy beliefs.Proof-of-Concept: Data science output has been formulated,implemented, and tested for one domain/problemSUMMARYMemetics has so far been developing in social sciences, but to fully understand memetic processes it shouldbe linked to neuroscience models of learning, encoding, and retrieval of memories in the brain. Attractor neu-ral networks show how incoming information is encoded in memory patterns, how it may become distorted,and how chunks of information may form patterns that are activated by many cues, forming the foundation ofconspiracy theories. The rapid freezing of high neuroplasticity (RFHN) model is offered as one plausiblemechanism of such processes. Illustrations of distorted memory formation based on simulations of compet-itive learning neural networks are presented as an example. Linking memes to attractors of neurodynamicsshould help to give memetics solid foundations, show why some information is easily encoded and propa-gated, and draw attention to the need to analyze neural mechanisms of learning and memory that lead toconspiracies.INTRODUCTIONConspiracy theories are part of a much wider subject: formationof beliefs, creation of memes, distorted memories, twistedworldviews, or in general investigating ways in which learningfails to represent the data faithfully. In recent article by Seitzand Angel ‘‘Belief formation – A driving force for brain evolu-tion,’’1 the authors write: ‘‘The topic of belief has been neglectedin the natural sciences for a long period of time’’. They dividebeliefs into empirical, relational, and conceptual, discussinglarge brain areas involved in the formation of beliefs. Bayesianmodels of belief propagation are used to model details ofperceptual processes and relate them to connectomes.2 Theartificial neural network community has focused on faithfullearning methods, but there is another, neglected side of learningand memory formation. When the training data are not learnedperfectly, what types of errors may one expect, and how willthey influence the performance of an artificial system? Can anal-ysis of artificial systems help to understand how biological brainslearn incoming information, transforming it into memes that arelikely to be transmitted in a distorted form to other brains? Theworld view that we use to guide our behavior is based on anetwork of associative memory states. Consolidation of newmemory states in the neocortex may occur quite quickly if theyare well connected to other memory states.3 Several lines ofresearch lead to this conclusion: animal studies, association ofplaces with items in mnemotechnics, behavioral studies on theuse of schemas for rapid learning, and building of cognitivemaps. Neural models of schemas and sequences of associa-tions may be based on attractor states in neural networks.4Each episodic or semantic memory state is based on activationsof synchronized, distributed networks of brain regions. It isPatterns 2, November 12, 2021 ª 2021 The Author(s). 1This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).llOPEN ACCESSencoded in relation to the existing activation patterns and maybe modified when new patterns are learned.internalUsing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) evokedby natural movies, Huth et al.5,6 have created a ‘‘semantic atlas,’’showing patterns of brain activations for categories of hundredsof objects and actions. These patterns are evoked by stimuli thatprovide sufficient cues to recall specific objects, such as bodyparts, animals, furniture, or types of actions. This process maybe described using the language of dynamical systems for net-works of elements representing neurons. The Hopfield network7was the simplest associative memory model encoding informa-tion in activation patterns of network nodes. In such recurrentnetworks,feedback changes activity patterns withtime; this process is referred to as neurodynamics. All kinds ofmemory states (semantic, episodic, procedural, and working)are called attractors of neurodynamics4 because initial patternsof neural network activations are attracted by the network dy-namics toward one of the quasi-stable memory patterns. Usuallyonly a small subset of neurons are highly active in each pattern,synchronizing their activity sending signals through strongIn biologically motivated attractor net-mutual connections.works, memory states are not stable, and neural noise, fatigue,and other processes lead to desynchronization, decrease activ-ity of some neurons, and recruit others, forming different neuralpatterns. Transitions between neural patterns define trajectoryof brain state changes in the space of neural activations. In arti-ficial systems we can visualize it to observe neurodynamics ofmodel networks8 and transform it to dimensions that are mean-ingful at the mental level.9 fMRI scans provide snapshots of thewhole brain activation with temporal resolution of about 1 sand spatial resolution of about 1 mm, while measurement ofelectric potentials using electroencephalographic or magneto-encephalographic techniques provides millisecond temporalresolution but spatial resolution that is less than 1 cm.Seitz et al.10 presented a general theoretical model of forma-tions of empirically grounded and metaphysical beliefs. In theirview,the process of attraction is described by the verb‘‘believing,’’ and the endpoint, the final activation quasi-stablestate, is called a ‘‘belief’’ and is interpreted as a mental construct.Beliefs are based on sensory perception and attribution of a per-sonal value in an emotionally loaded process. High-level formularelates beliefs to incoming signals, ambient noise, current andprevious valuation, learning, and prediction errors. Changes ofneural activation in real brains depend on current knowledgeschemas, history of previous activations (priming), generalemotional state, specific context cues that invoke memories,and many other factors. Transitions that happen frequently in-crease probability of association between different activationpatterns11 and may not only create strong associations butdistort or even completely blend different memories, creatingfalse memories.12,13 Understanding abnormal belief formationin neuropsychological disorders is an important challenge,14but neuropsychiatry needs precise hypotheses and models atthe level of neural networks.In some cases, memories may become easily activated invarious contexts, leading to false associations and schemasthat develop into conspiracy theories. While there is a largebody of literature on conspiracy theories written by historians,philosophers, psychologists, sociologists, or political scientists2 Patterns 2, November 12, 2021Perspective(Routledge has a whole series of books on conspiracy theories;see also the review by Douglas et al.15), our understanding of thebrain mechanisms is completely lacking. The best explanationsthat we have relate beliefs in conspiracy theories to personalitytraits, mental disorders, or the need to find a simple satisfactoryexplanation.Memetics, introduced in the 1976 book The Selfish Gene byRichard Dawkins,16 tried to explain cultural information transferand persistence of certain ideas in societies. Memes may be un-derstood as sequences or information structures that tend toreplicate in a society. Despite great initial popularity of memeticideas, and the desperate need of mathematical theories to un-derpin social science, theories connecting neuroscience andmemetics have never been developed. The Journal of Memeticswas discontinued in 2005 after 8 years of electronic publishing.Memetic ideas were relegated into a set of vague philosophicaland psychological concepts of little interest to neuroscience. Inevolutionary computing, memetic ideas have inspired manynew developments, combining global search with focus on inter-esting local regions.17 The Memetic Computing journal was es-tablished in 1989, a whole series of books on Advances inMemetic Algorithms. Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computingis published by Springer. Research on memetic computing isfocused on optimization problems, while here we are interestedin the process of formation of memories.The lack of efforts to understand distortions of informationtransmission and memory storage in biological learning systemsis certainly related to the lack of theoretical models, and to theexperimental difficulties in searching for memes in brain activity.McNamara18 has argued that neuroimaging technology may beused to trace memes in the brain and to measure how theychange over time. Following Heylighen and Chielens’19 memo-type and mediotype distinction, they propose to distinguishi-memes,internal activation of the central nervous system,from the external transmission/storage of information structures,the e-memes existing in the world (for example, created by mar-keting, or various media advertisements). One should distinguishclearly abstract information structure of memes, and their imple-mentation in the brain or in artificial cognitive system. Internalrepresentations of i-memes are created by forming memorystates that link neural responses resulting from e-meme percep-tion to behavioral(motor) responses that are necessary forreplication of memes, linking sensory, memory, and motor sub-systems in the brain. Sets of memes forming memeplexes deter-mine world views, including culture, values, and religions, pre-disposing people to accept and propagate selected memes.Brain research has made a great progress in understandingschemas in the last decade.20 Perhaps the time is ripe to makesome progress along these lines to link the concept of memeswith memory mechanisms that facilitate their spread. This couldhave very important social and educational implications.21In the fascinating book Why People Believe Weird Things,Michel Shermer writes about 25 fallacies that lead people tobelieve in conspiracy theories and other bizarre things.22 Brainsare predisposed to perceive various observed patterns as mean-ingful information (pareidolia), search for explanations and formtheories, referring to the long-term episodic and semantic mem-ory. The conceptual framework that is needed to interpret newobservations, including memes, is activated by various cuesPerspectivethat invoke memory associations. Memes that are strongly en-coded certainly influence most mental processes. Observationsthat agree with established individual beliefs will lead to strongactivations of brain networks, thanks to the mutual co-activa-tions of memeplex patterns, creating additional memes thatmake the whole memeplex even stronger. Contradicting argu-ments, facts, or observations will arouse only transient weak ac-tivations of brain networks and will be ignored. Worse than that,mentioning or presenting anything that may retrieve memes willonly increase their influence, contributing to stronger encodingand easier arousal of false associations. The ‘‘levels of process-ing’’ paradigm in memory research has now found support inneuroimaging of deep and shallow episodic memory encoding,modulated by a number of neurotransmitters and linked toemotional arousal.23 Research on forgetting shows that retrievalof competing memory traces may lead to interference and sup-pression of weaker patterns.24 If conspiracy memes are alreadydeeply encoded, they will distort formation of memory for contra-dicting facts. Although these facts may briefly activate brainpatterns, the presence of strong memes will redirect theseactivations away toward conspiracy memes, preventing theirunderstanding in a broader context.Science systematically tries to falsify hypotheses by performingexperiments, but, from the evolutionary perspective, falsificationis simply too dangerous. In slowly changing environments, stabil-ity of beliefs is more important, even at the price of wide accep-tance of meaningless taboos and superstitions. Even today,educational systems in most countries do not encourage skepticalthinking. Religious leaders and conservative politicians stronglyoppose instating skepticism into the educational system, in fearof destabilization of established world views. There is little or nopenalty for accepting false beliefs by individuals. Mutual supportwithin groups of believers gives a boost to distorted views of real-ity, leading to bizarre conspiracy theories.The discussion presented above shows that fake news andconspiracy theories tap into basic brain mechanisms of memoryand learning. The complexity of the belief formation processeshas discouraged scientists from approaching this importantis goingproblem. Obviously, no simple computational modelto explain all facts related to formation and preservation of hu-man beliefs, and in particular of conspiracy theories. This shouldnot discourage us from forming testable hypotheses based onneurodynamics. After all, simple neural network models intro-duced by Hopfield7 and Kohonen,25 despite being only looselyinspired by neurobiology, have found a number of applicationsin computational psychology and psychiatry. The central roleof large-scale neural dynamics as a basis for understandingbrain processes is now well recognized.26,27 The two main goalsof this paper are thus to show that memetics may be based onsolid theoreticalfoundations grounded in neurodynamicalmodels, and that learning using simple memory models mayhelp to understand the process of formation of conspiracy the-ories. Although only simple competitive learning models areused in this paper, it should open the road toward applicationof more complex neural models that link memetics with neuro-science. Of course, psychological and social factors preparethe neural system for specific action, but, as Sapolsky stressedin his book, ‘‘you can’t begin to understand things like aggres-sion, competition, cooperation, and empathy without biology.’’28llOPEN ACCESSThe next section introduces memetics and discusses repre-sentation of information in the brain. It includes an attempt todefine memes in a similar way to how genes are defined. It is fol-lowed by a section on competitive learning models of memoryformation. These models are used to illustrate some mecha-nisms of memory distortions. Final conclusions and remarksabout implications of network simulations for the theory of mem-etics are presented in the final section.MEMETICS AND INFORMATION IN THE BRAINSubjective informationUltimately all thoughts and beliefs result from neurodynamics.The flow of neural activation through neural systems is deter-mined by many biological factors, including brain connectivity,concentration of neurotransmitters, emotional arousal, primingeffects, and brain stem activity. Information is acquired and inter-nalized in the brain through direct observation of patterns in theworld, including communication with people and animals, andindirectly through various media, texts, and physical symbolsof all sorts. Brains provide material support for mental pro-cesses, understanding and remembering symbols, ideas, andstories. Memes are units of information that spread in cultural en-vironments, information granules that prompt activation of pat-terns in brains molded by particular subculture. Therefore thesame information may become a meme in some brains, andmay be ignored by other brains.Understanding is a process that requires association of newinformation with what has already been learned. New thingsare learned on the basis of what is already known by the system.This is a general principle behind brain activity: information gainshould be measured as a change induced in cognitive sys-tems.29 Patterns are encoded in memory depending on thecontext, sequence of events, attention devoted to these pat-terns, association with known facts, properties of already en-coded information, and general mental state during the encodingprocess. The definition of Shannon information as entropy doesnot capture the intuitive meaning of the value of information forthe cognitive system. The amount of optimal restructuring ofthe internal model of the environment (optimal in the minimumlength description sense30) resulting from new observation (i.e.,a new meme added to the memeplex) is a good subjective mea-sure of the quantity of meaningful information carried out by thisobservation. Pragmatic information that captures the subjectivemeaning of information is based on the difference between algo-rithmic information before and after observation is made.29 Ittiand Baldi used a similar idea to define the amount of surprise,measured as the relative entropy or Kullback-Leibler (KL) diver-gence, between the posterior and prior distributions of beliefsin Bayesian models.31Memes as patterns of brain activityOrganisms replicate preserving most of their properties thanksto genes that are copied with great precision during cell divi-sions. However, the way from genes to phenotypes is long andindirect. Many factors may influence the final development. Atsome stage, the replication process is facilitated by, or mayeven require, ‘‘extended phenotype,’’32 specific environment,or constructions such as nests, burrows, or hospitals. In ThePatterns 2, November 12, 2021 3llOPEN ACCESSSelfish Gene,16 Richard Dawkins introduced the idea of memesusing analogy with genes: depending on the cultural environ-ment, some ideas, news, melodies, videos, or behaviors areimitated and replicated. This process has some properties thatare analogous with biological evolution: inheritance, mutation,variation, cooperation, and competition. Memetics emerged asa field of study in the 1990s to explore such analogies. Althoughcategorization of various phenomena into discrete units may becriticized, phenotypes of some organisms may also be verydiverse, with large numbers of species belonging to one family,such as 10 million arthropods or thousands of nudibranchsthat have unique forms. Cultural phenomena may look quitedifferent, but the mechanism of their proliferation may be basedon memes that have certain structures. Dawkins sees the dis-covery by Lorenz of imprinting, a behavior pattern, as akin toan anatomical organ.32 He quotes the suggestion of hiscolleague N.K. Humphrey that memes should be ‘‘physicallyresiding in the brain’’, and are not only metaphors. However,attempts to create a scientific theory of memes as neuralprocesses have not been successful.Memes are hard to objectively characterize or measure. In1981, C.J. Lumsden and E.O. Wilson wrote a book33 on co-evo-lution of genes, minds, and culture, explaining how genes andepigenetic rules determine perceptions and influence culturalevolution, and how they lead to development of specific cogni-tive functions, including various types of memory, explainingsocial behavior. They have used the term ‘‘culturgene’’ (in laterwritings, Wilson himself used ‘‘meme’’) to describe the processof gene-culture translation using a mathematical model similarto models in population genetics. One of the goals was to estab-lish ‘‘causal connections between semiotics and biology.’’Memes were linked to the nodes of semantic memory. In hisnext book, Consilience (1998), Wilson wrote,34 ‘‘If the connec-tions can be established empirically, then future discoveries con-cerning the nodes of semantic memory will correspondinglysharpen the definition of memes. Such an advance will enrich,not replace, semiotics.’’The concept of a gene has significantly changed in recent years.Genes, once defined as sequences of DNA base pairs that codeproteins, are now understood as distributed DNA and RNAtemplates, with exons on different chromosomes, ‘‘encoding acoherent set of potentially overlapping functional products.’’35Precise definition of a gene is difficult because they are structuresof partially mutable, highly organized molecular matter living inspecific network of complex processes. They exist because ahighly specialized environment facilitates their replication. Strongcoupling of all elements in this environment makes the concept ofa gene rather fuzzy: it is not a simple DNA sequence but a complexpattern in the whole network of processes, active only in certainsituations controlled by epigenetic factors. The whole system isresponsible for replication of information.In memetics, information structures that reflect part of mentalcontent based on a network of memes are called memeplexes.They evolve in response to enculturation and exposure toobserved patterns. Specific cultural behaviors, learned con-cepts, word meanings, collocations, or phrases describing ideasmay be treated as memes. Some are very rare and difficult to ac-quire, while others spread quickly with ease. Mental content canbe much wider than just the network of memes. Memetics4 Patterns 2, November 12, 2021Perspectiveshould position itself in respect to the theory of communication,language acquisition, and neural theories of learning.Consider now a representation of a meme in the brain of an in-dividual. It is a memory pattern recalled frequently, a state of thewhole brain network that arises in many contexts. Wilson thoughtthat it is a node in the semantic memory, but it does not haveproperties that define semantic information that arises fromfiltering of episodic memory. Semantic information is learnedslowly and is remembered for a long time, while memes arequickly acquired and may be soon forgotten. Semantic mem-ories are based on well-established pathways of brain activa-tions, allowing us to understand meaning of words and con-cepts.36,37 They provide conceptualframework for generalunderstanding of the world. Conceptual spaces have been intro-duced by G€ardenfors38 as a geometric framework for represent-ing information at the conceptual level, bridging symbolic andneural representations. Concepts are characterized in terms ofperceptual and abstract qualities that are treated as separatedimensions. Features are defined as subsets along one ormore dimensions, and concepts that have many features formconvex shapes in conceptual spaces. This approach has beenquite successfulin cognitive science, and similar ideas havebeen developed in cognitive linguistics. Fauconnier wrote abook on mental spaces39 and another book with Turner on con-ceptual blending.40 However, such conceptual models ignorethe neurobiological basis of memory.Concept learning in real brains is a result of complex neurody-namics and changes of neuronal pathways due to neuroplastic-ity. Conceptual or mental spaces, although highly influential, arenot the best simplification of this process. An alternative hasbeen offered by clusterization of neural activation patterns thatmay be represented by fuzzy prototypes rather than combinationof features.41 Mental events are not restricted to concepts, theyare shadows of neurodynamics, metaphorically speaking.9Episodic memories are learned quickly, invoke associationsthat induce chains of mutations, and depend on cultural environ-ment and socialinteractions. Semantic memory is largelyrestricted to concepts, states that are deeply entrenched in thebrain networks, and have associated phonological representa-tion. Episodic memory recalls brain state at the time of actualexperience, and involves imagery, emotions, and behavior, allaspects of experience. Events are memorized without the needfor repetition, especially in the case of emotional arousal that in-creases neuroplasticity. Episodic memories are mental eventslinked together in experiential spaces. Recently, a new modelof spatial and non-spatial memory spaces based on topologicalschemas of representations of events derived from neuronalspiking activity has been formulated.42 Such models may bridgethe conceptual and neural levels of brain processes.Memes may be considered at several levels: as abstract unitsof culturalinformation, that exist physically in electronic orprinted media, called e-memes by McNamara.18 Informationbecomes a meme only if some brains are ready to store it asi-memes, and transmit it further. While almost all work in mem-etics has been focused on e-memes, this paper is an attemptto define and understand formation of i-memes.Using the language of neurodynamics a meme is defined as aquasi-stable associative memory attractor state, with robustattractor basin. Brain activation A(w) prompted by stimulus wPerspective(a word, set of words, seeing a symbol) may rapidly evoke acti-vation corresponding to meme A(w) / A(M(w)). The sameattractor state may be activated by many different stimuli,including purely internal activations. For simple visual percepts,such as shapes of objects, similarity between brain activationsA(M)in the inferotemporal cortical area have been directlycompared, using fMRI neuroimaging, with the similarity of theshapes of these objects.43 Significant similarity has also beenfound in the fMRI patterns of whole-brain activity when peopleperceive and think about specific objects,5,6,44 showing howmeaning of concepts is encoded in distributed activity of thebrain. Such encoding may be used for brain-based vector repre-sentation of the semantic meaning in natural language process-ing (NLP) algorithms.45 Similarity between memes correspond-ing to perceived objects Mi5Oi, may be roughly comparedwith some measures of similarity between object properties.Therefore, similarity between brain activities A(M1) and A(M2)that represent two memes M1 and M2 evoked by objectsO1,O2 (percepts, cues, words) should be directly related tosome measures of object similarity:Sa(A(M1),A(M2)) (cid:1) So(O1,O2).(Equation 1)McNamara18 hopes to detect the signature patterns of newmemes by analyzing the neurodynamics oflearning novelname-action associations for abstract category names, lookingat the changes of the brain connectivity profiles. This may be auseful strategy for abstract categories, or for simple percepts,but general search for signatures of memes using neuroimagingtechniques will be very difficult. Activation patterns may signifi-cantly differ for individual people, depending on their meme-plexes. For the same person, distribution of fMRI activationsmay change at different times of the day. Transcranial magneticstimulation (TMS) disrupting the function of the left inferior frontalgyrus has already been used to alter belief formation in favor ofremembering more bad news.46 Such brain stimulation may beused to change acceptance of memes that would normally beignored.Memes are difficult to extract from the whole network of brainactivities. They exist as transient patterns in neurodynamics.Memory patterns arise due to the functional connectivity of neu-rons. In this dynamic process, brain regions that may be physi-cally connected in a direct or an indirect way exchange informa-tion forming synchronized global states. Connectomics is still anew field, developing methods to describe details of structuraland functional connectivity, and network neuroscience is usingthis knowledge to create dynamical models of cognitive and af-fective processes.47 Structural brain connectivity is formed bygenetics and developmental processes, and, thanks to neuro-plasticity, shaped by life experiences, learning processes, socialinteractions, and culture.Understanding how brain connectivity and otherfactorsencode beliefs, filter incoming information, distort it, and trans-mits it further is certainly a grand challenge. Complex informationprocessing in the brain has not yet been understood in sufficientdetail to allow for development of comprehensive theories ofsuch processes. Techniques based on fMRI do not offer suffi-cient temporal resolution, while electroencephalography andllOPEN ACCESSrelated techniques do not offer spatial resolution to follow pre-cisely dynamical changes during mental processes. However,some insights based on simple memory models may be gained.New information added to the memeplex (existing pool of inter-acting memes, or attractor states) becomes distorted, changesthe memeplex, and is replicated further. Once a set of distortedmemory states is entrenched, it becomes a powerful force,attracting and distorting all information that has some associa-tion with these states, creating even broader basins of attractors.Encoding of information in this way enhances the memeplex andis one of the reasons why conspiracy theories are so persistent.Concepts in brains and in computersIn the NLP field, word meaning is approximated using correla-tions between co-occurrence with several adjacent words.Vectors storing these correlation coefficients C(w) representwords w by averaging over many contexts restricted to a specificmeaning of a given word (this requires annotation of large textcorpora). From the human point of view, faithful representationof word meaning should require similar ordering of distancesD(C(w1),C(w2)) between vectors C(w1),C(w2) representing wordsw1, w2, as shown by dissimilarities DSa(A(w1), A(w2)) betweenbrain activations A(w) when concepts associated with thesewords are invoked:DSa(A(w1),A(w2)) (cid:1) D(C(w1),C(w2))(Equation 2)Each vector C(w) attempts to approximate the meaning of theword that is encoded in the distribution of brain activity.44,45Without priming effects48 and association of words with existingmemory patterns, only a very coarse representation is possible.Brain activations strongly depend on context, and therefore thedistance function D(C(w1),C(w2); cont) should be context depen-dent. The whole process is dynamic, with spreading of neural ac-tivations responsible for priming related concepts and providingfeedback that becomes part of the new pattern encoding. Mean-ing is thus connected to the activation of many subnetworks inthe brain, memory of sensory qualities, and motor affordances.A dynamical approach to the NLP vector model has not yetbeen fully developed, although some steps in this directionhave been made.36 Despite our efforts (Duch, unpublished) todescribe dog breeds in terms of skin, head, and body featuresderived from databases and semi-structured texts describingdogs, it was not possible to categorize accurately dog breedsonly by their features. Using images (or just silhouettes) ofdogs leads to more accurate and faster identification of dogbreeds. Brain activity evoked by hearing or reading wordsevokes internal imagery at a high level of invariant, multimodalobjectrecognition. Similarity functions between objectsSo(O1,O2) based only on correlations between verbal descriptorscannot do justice to estimations of similarity of brain activations.Finer discrimination may require recall of lower-level sensoryqualities, referring to particular shapes, colors, movements,voice timbre, or tastes. Vector representation based on wordcorrelations does not reflect essential properties of the percep-tion-action-naming activity of the brain,49 and it does not evencontain structural description in terms of object features orphonology. More details on word representation in the brainPatterns 2, November 12, 2021 5llOPEN ACCESSand its relation to the vector model may be found in Binderet al.45 Words have phonological representations that serve aslabels pointing to internalized knowledge about their meaning.Representation of percepts arising from sensory imagery is aminimal requirement for NLP systems capable of semantic inter-pretation of concepts.Competitive learning models are introduced next and thenused to illustrate the process of learning that leads to memesbased on distorted relations.COMPETITIVE LEARNING AND WEIRD BELIEFSConspiracy theories have serious consequences for politics,especially environmental policies, with the anti-vaccinemovement becoming a threat to global health. They facilitategrowth of political extremists and dangerous religious sects.22Conspiracy theories are investigated mainly by sociologistsand psychologists, focusing on hidden networks controlling po-litical and economic factors that are poorly understood. Insteadof analyzing why and how brains form weird, distorted views ofreality, they invent vague concepts and construct theories thatare impossible to connect with brain research. While there aremany psychological reasons for formation of such beliefs, sofar there have been no attempts to create a cognitive theory sup-ported by computational models, capable of generating testablehypotheses. In the past, secret societies were rather rare, butnow media try to stir controversy discussing genetically modifiedorganisms, vaccines, AIDS, miracle cures, unidentified flying ob-jects, prophecies, assassinations, airplane crushes, and othersuch issues, despite plausible explanations based on scientificarguments or on common-sense consensus.The language of memetics is descriptive and does not help toexplain deeper reasons why some information become memesand others are forgotten.16,50 Conspiracy theory may be treatedas a memeplex that is easily activated by various pieces ofinformation, giving it meaning consistent with the memeplex re-sponses. From a neurobiological perspective, learning requiresadaptation, changing functional connectivity, and adjustingthe physical structure of the brain. Learning is thus energyconsuming, and requires effort that should be carried out onlywhen there are potential benefits. Simple explanations of com-plex phenomena thus have a great advantage even when theyare quite naive, as long as they do not lead to behaviors thatare obviously harmful or significantly decrease chances forreproduction. Evolutionary Darwinian adaptations are estab-lished only after several generations and have noticeable influ-ence on human beliefs only if they affect large subpopulations.Evolutionary factors explain slow changes in approaches tohuman freedom, caste and racial divisions, abandonment ofslavery, attitudes toward children (selling children into slaverycontinued until the nineteenth century), etc. Why do some peopleeasily fall for conspiracy theories and other stay skeptical? Thefield of neural networks, aiming at achieving perfection inlearning, paid little attention to distortions of learning and itseffects on memory states.There are many scenarios that may lead to formation of dis-torted views of observations, and it is not possible to create aneural model that takes into account all factors identified in theliterature on this topic. Slow and steady environmental pressures6 Patterns 2, November 12, 2021Perspectivelead to changes of attitude and may redefine the whole worldview. Here I will focus on a rather common situation that arisesas the result of rapid decrease in neuroplasticity. Emotionalarousal coming from the uncertainty of important information(e.g., rumors that something potentially life threatening hashappened) leads to confusion and strong anxiety (the rumorsmay not be true; it is not clear what has really happened). Highemotions and stress are linked to release of large amounts ofneurotransmitters and neuromodulators from the brain stemnuclei, through the ascending pathways, activating serotonin,norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and dopamine systems. Strongarousal increases brain plasticity, facilitating rapid learning ofall potentially relevant cues.51 Emotionally salient stimuli evokeselective attention, adding more brain states that are closelylinked to those that have initially been created. Such states arisewhen input signals partially overlap, and they share some prop-erties, either related to perception or associations recalled frommemory. In attractor networks, similar states share a subset ofactive neurons. In the visualizations below, each brain state isrepresented by a small circle, and similarity of brain patterns isrepre-represented by distance between the circles thatsent them.Information that arouses emotions and strong neuroplasticityleads to rapid learning. Priming effects48 direct attention tosearch for more information on the same topic, sharing somefeatures (activating similar brain regions) with the initial informa-tion. Dynamical systems perspective on behavioral priming inattractor networks has been presented in Krpan.52 After sometime, emotions subside, arousal will lessen, sources of neuro-transmitters will be depleted, and neuroplasticity will decrease.Thus, the recipe to create a memeplex based on distorted beliefsis, first, priming by uncertain information and strong emotionalarousal, followed by selective memorization of information thatmatches initial impression, and decrease of neuroplasticity thatmay result from information overload. A short period of acutestress may potentiate learning, but, when it lasts longer, neuro-plasticity decreases. The brain network is left with a memeplexbased on selected memories frozen in its associative memory.All future information related to the initial event will be associatedand interpreted in view of what has been memorized at thatperiod, setting foundations for conspiracy theory.This scenario may be reproduced in many unsupervisedcompetitive learning neural models,25 including adaptive reso-nance theory (ART) models that regulate neuroplasticity usingthe vigilance parameter.53,54 Many other competitive learningmodels based on Hebbian learning have been presented.55The DemoGNG 2.2 Java package, written by Bernd Fritzke andHartmut S. Loos,56 implements winner-take-all learning in self-organizing map (SOM), competitive Hebbian and hard competi-tive learning, neural gas, growing neural gas, growing grid, andother algorithms.57 In all these algorithms, activity of units repre-senting neurons is compared with the input, and those units withthe best match adapt their parameters, increasing their activa-tion. Neurons in the neighborhood of a winner are also allowedto adapt, depending on their distance from the winner. If thereis no clear match, constructive algorithms add new neurons,allowing the network to grow.The rapid freezing of high neuroplasticity (RFHN) modeldescribed here is based on the following assumptions:Perspectived Emotions and uncertain stressful situations at the begin-ning of learning lead to high neuroplasticity.d High neuroplasticity is imitated in the model by largelearning rates (due to the primary neurotransmitters), andby a broad neighborhood of the winner neuron for eachinput pattern (due to the diffuse neuromodulation and vol-ume learning).d The network tries to reflect associations between inputvectors, adapting neuron parameters (usually codebookvectors) to approximate distribution of information con-tained in the presented input vectors.d Sudden decrease of the uncertainty and emotional arousalis mirrored by the decrease of learning rates and neighbor-hood sizes, leading to distortions of complex relationsbetween input items.d Slow forgetting that follows rapid freezing is based onmemory reactivations, and contributes to the retention ofmemory states represented by the highest number of neu-rons only, forming clusters of nodes with large and strongbasins of attraction that link many states.d Clusters of neurons that are frequently activated and thuseasily replicated represent memes.d Conspiracy theories are characterized by memplexes,numerous strong memes, with many neurons encoding in-formation that has never been presented, forming dis-torted associations between facts.As a result, these networks do not reflect real observations.The role of emotions in susceptibility to fake news has been veri-fied in a recent experiment.58 The RFHN model may be simulatedusing several competitive learning models. In fact, all suchmodels show similar behavior; therefore, only the results ofSOMs25 and the neural gas model with competitive Hebbianlearning (NG-CHL)56 are shown below for illustration.The basic idea of competitive learning is to approximate theactivity of neural cell assemblies by neurons (units) that serveas codebook vectors W(t). They represent receptive fields,adapting to the probability density of the incoming signals.Each neuron receives input signals and competes with otherneurons using the winner-takes-most (or takes all) principle,leaving only a small subset of active units that are updated.The winning neural assembly is represented by a vector W(c) (t)and a small group of vectors in its direct neighborhood O(c).SOM starts with a fixed two-dimensional grid of neurons.Learning proceeds by identifying the most similar codebook vec-tor to the current observation X(t), and updating the codebookvector and vectors in its immediate physical neighborhood ac-cording to the formula:For ci˛ð0ÞWðiÞðt + 1Þ = WðiÞðtÞ + hðri; rc; tÞ(cid:1)XðtÞ (cid:3) WðiÞðtÞ(cid:3)(Equation 3)where the neighborhood is usually assumed to be Gaussian:hðr; rc; t; ε; sÞ = εðtÞexp(cid:4)(cid:3) kr (cid:3) rck2(cid:5)(cid:6)s2ðtÞ(Equation 4)llOPEN ACCESS(Equation 5)sðtÞ = si(cid:8)t=tmax(cid:7)sfsiThe maximal age tmax determines the annealing schedule. Thelearning rate is similarly decreased by:εðtÞ = εi(cid:8)t=tmax(cid:7)εfεi(Equation 6)The SOM model has been used with success in many applica-tions; for example, it works quite well, in comparison with otherneural models, for explanation of details of orientation and oculardominance columns in the visual cortex.59The NG-CHL algorithm does not have such fixed initial grid to-pology as does SOM, and new neurons are recruited for encodinginput patterns. At each adaptation step, a connection between thewinner and the second-nearest unit is created, if it does notalready exist. The newly created or existing selected edges are re-freshed receiving age = 0, while the ages of other edgesemanating from the winner neurons are increased by 1. The refer-ence age is gradually changed from Ti to Tf according to:TðtÞ = Ti(cid:8)t=tmax(cid:7)TfTi(Equation 7)Edges that are not refreshed for more than T(t) steps areremoved. This simulates the forgetting mechanism.The following computational experiments have been done toillustrate the RFHN model:d Training SOM and NG-CHL on stationary data concen-trated in two distinct areas, with initial high plasticity andrapidly decreasing learning rates.d Training SOM and NG-CHL on non-stationary data fromobservations that move and suddenly change, with initialhigh plasticity and rapidly decreasing learning rates.d Retraining the model after malformation of relations hasalready occurred, using temporally increased plasticity.The number of neurons in the brain is extremely large, so it isinstructive to check how the number of network nodes in simula-tions will affect distributions. For the stationary experiments,10,000 nodes have been used, with initial parameters randomlydistributed, and signals coming from two separated circular areas.This should represent two alternative situations that are moni-tored. For the non-stationary situation, all parameters were initiallyconcentrated in the rectangular patch, simulating situations inwhich restricted domain has already been learned and is stable.Then the patch moves across the whole domain, providing newinput patterns (observations) from the areas it covers. When theedge of the domain is reached, the patch jumps to the other side.The size of this neighborhood is decreased from the initialvalue of dispersion si to the final value sf according to theformula:The algorithms used here are stochastic, so results may differafter each run. This is actually desired, because exposing aCONSPIRACIES AND MEMORY DISTORTIONSPatterns 2, November 12, 2021 7llOPEN ACCESSPerspectiveFigure 1. SOM network learning slowlystationary uniform samples drawn fromdouble circles approximates these twocircular distributions correctlygroup of people with similar memplexes will also lead to differentchanges. At this level of modeling, only qualitative results may beexpected. Each fragment of information (signal, or chunk) is rep-resented by a dot in figures below. Associations between thesefragments determine mutual distance in graphs, reflecting simi-larity of encoded information chunks in the neural model. Chunksof information that appear in the same context (or batch ofsignals provided as input) become strongly associated.Stationary situationPerfect representation of all signals should cover two distinctcircular areas (Figure 1). A good solution that requires slowlearning with 500,000 steps is shown below. The domain andrelations (represented by edges) of input patterns are repre-sented fairly well.Training 100 3 100 SOM network, with initial si = 5, sf = 0.01, εi= 1, εf = 0.001, for 10,000 steps, did not pull all parameters ofneurons toward the data area. Despite high density of neurons,some gaps have been left and were not removed by further re-training. This effect comes from the dynamics of learning withshrinking neighborhoods. There is a greater chance for neuronsnear the edge to be pulled toward high-density areas by manyneurons that are selected as winners than to be pulled towardthe data in the gap area. Moreover, in the space where no sam-ples ever appeared, many neurons are placed, and this will leadto false associations and confabulations (Figure 2). These effectsare random due to the stochastic nature of learning. The resultingmap has the same character, although details differ every time itis simulated.The NG-CHL model with initial high plasticity and rapidlydecreasing learning rates has also produced big gaps andhigh-density areas, as seen in Figure 3. Forgetting parametershave been set to edgei = 20 and edgef = 200. Further retrainingwith fastforgetting creates even bigger gaps. Many inputpatterns are therefore associated with high-density clustersacting as memes. Associations with other input patterns arebased more on stereotypes (clusters) rather than faithful obser-vations.Non-stationary situationsInformation that reaches us through media or social networks isfragmented. If it is interesting or emotionally exciting, more sour-ces are searched for. Learning in non-stationary situations ismuch more difficult and therefore distortions in representationare much stronger. In the figures below, a dark rectangle movesrandomly across the whole area and the training data that shouldbe learned appear only inside its area.Using the same parameters as for the stationary case, SOMstarted with high plasticity that was rapidly decreased in10,000 steps. The map in Figure 4 shows very strong concentra-tion of nodes that point to the initial patterns. The network did notlearn much during the later part of the training. It has ignoredmost of the facts coming after the rapid learning period, creatingone big sink for all associations. Such a network will interpretFigure 2. SOM network learning the samedistribution as in Figure 1, with fast decreaseof plasticity, covers areas where no samplesappeared and leaves large gaps in thedata space8 Patterns 2, November 12, 2021PerspectivellOPEN ACCESSFigure 3. The neural gas model with fast decrease of plasticity creates even stronger distortion of original distribution than the SOM mapin Figure 2, leaving many gaps and covering empty space denselymost input data as similar to what it has seen in the critical periodof high plasticity.Further training with increased plasticity may somehow repairthe distorted view, although, even after a very long training(Figure 5), a strong meme that has been formed in the center isstill present. A large basin of attraction for this meme will leadto its frequent activation even by irrelevant input patterns. Afteradditional 100,000 steps with slow annealing of the central sinkmay disentangle to some degree, providing a distorted, butmore diversified, map.The NG-CHL algorithm may also create completely distortedrepresentation. After 40,000 steps with rapid decrease of plas-ticity, it has created two separate memplexes, each with severalstrong memes that are used to interpret all incoming patterns(Figure 6).Maps created with rapid decrease of high plasticity are quiteunstable. In Figure 7, another solution is shown with four largermemeplexes that completely distort the view of the input pat-terns. It is quite difficult to create faithful representations of inputpatterns for non-stationary signals. Very long training times withseveral hundred-thousand iterations are needed to achieve this.Although central beliefs may be similar within a group of conspir-acy believers, a number of subgroups may emerge.In rapidly changing situations, it is much more likely that a dis-torted view will be learned instead of a faithful representation ofreality. Gaining experience in changing environments obviouslytakes more time, as can be observed in many domains suchas medicine, where initial background knowledge is slowlystructured into high competence by the working environment.CONCLUSIONSBelief formation may be investigated at the biological and psy-chological levels. Predispositions for accepting distorted viewsof reality may come as a side effect of education and life experi-ences and therefore are rather hard to investigate. Acceptingsimple explanations is rewarding and creates pleasant feelingsof understanding. Complex explanations require a lot of effortand a long time to understand them fully. A simple (althoughinadequate) explanation is always better than to have no expla-nation at all, saving energy required for learning and creating a(false) impression of reducing uncertainty. Many papers havebeen written on this subject from a psychological perspective.15The European Union supports European Cooperation in Scienceand Technology (COST) networking action on ComparativeAnalysis of Conspiracy Theories (COMPACT), which gathers re-searchers in history, sociology, psychology, and political sci-ences interested in conspiracy theories.60From a biological perspective, beliefs have been defined as‘‘the neural product of perception of objects and events in theexternal world’’14 or ‘‘the neuropsychic product offunda-mental brain processes that attribute affective meaning toconcrete objects and events and of an affirmative internal af-fective state reflecting personal meaning,’’10 but what arethese fundamental brain processes, and why do peoplebelieve in conspiracy theories? Because mechanisms ofmemory formation in the brain work the way they do. Neuro-dynamics helps to understand the conditions under whichlarge basins of attraction, called memes, are created in mem-ory networks, and how and why they form memplexes thatlead to the distorted associations. This is an important steptoward linking memetics with theoretical and experimentalbrain science. Perhaps patterns of brain signals correspond-ing to memes can be measured,18 and computer simulationsshould help to define most suitable experimental conditions.With the advent of highly detailed brain simulations and neuro-imaging techniques, we should be able to understand pre-cisely the mechanism behind false memory formation.Patterns 2, November 12, 2021 9llOPEN ACCESSPerspectiveFigure 4. SOM with rapidly decreasing plasticity for non-stationary distributionSamples come here from a moving square (seen in the left corner) and with very slow learning are uniformly distributed in the whole rectangle, but fast learningleads to completely distorted associations.However, it should be possible to repeat the experiments onartificial distributions with maps based on texts in somerestricted domain. Each network node will represent than aword, and distances between words will be based on theirsimilarity in a given context. Such models should allow forsemi-realistic analysis of formation of distorted world views.What lessons can we draw from computational experiments withcompetitive learning? The RFHN model presented here is veryFigure 5. Non-stationary case, neural gasmap as in Figure 4, followed by long, slowtraining (100,000 steps) only partiallyrecovers uniform distribution, leaving largeconcentration of the codebook vectors in themiddle10 Patterns 2, November 12, 2021PerspectivellOPEN ACCESSFigure 6. In the non-stationary case, neural gas created two densely connected structures and did not encode signals from many areassimple, but it seems that all types of competitive learning modelsshow similar behavior. More complex models with high-dimen-sional input patterns almost certainly will have even bigger prob-lems with faithful representation of input patterns using the rapidfreezing of neuroplasticity scenario, and will lead to large attractorbasins that can be interpreted as memes. Slow learning leads tofaithful representations, but, if the information is false (for example,frequently repeated in media), it may also end in conspiracy theory.Figure 7. Another neural gas map for non-stationary case, showing how unstable suchlearning may bePatterns 2, November 12, 2021 11llOPEN ACCESSPerspectiveA lie repeated 10,000 times becomes truth, as in the famous Big Liepropaganda technique. On the other hand, after formation of mem-plexes, slow long learning may lead to some improvement of theveracity of information represented, especially if neuroplasticity isenhanced by emotional arousal.Although factors that contribute to the individual mental stateand influence formation of memories are very diverse, peoplethat subscribe to specific subcultures share many commonbeliefs and contribute to replication of specific memes. In suchsubcultures, memes, units of cultural transmission, may becomeviral because they complement already existing episodic mem-ories, extending memplexes that are common in such popula-tions, adding new, easily excitable elements strongly associatedwith already memorized memes. Creation of such realisticmodels is a big challenge.The contributions of this paper are 2-fold. First, memetics theoryhas been developed in social sciences but a link to neurosciencehas been missing. Linking memes to attractors of neurodynamicsshould help to give memetics solid foundations. Second, analysisof formation of weird beliefs is very important, but so far there havebeen no models of brain processes that could explain the creationof such beliefs. Simulations presented here should draw attentionto the need for analysis of the type of distortions that are commonin neural networks. Of course, more complex neural models will beneeded to allow for predictions that could be compared with theresults of neuroimaging and behavioral experiments, but evensuch coarse models based on competitive learning networksmay serve as an illustration of putative processes responsible forformation of various conspiracy theories. Our next step is toperform such simulations on real data from the newspapers. Othercomputational models, such as ART53 and associative self-orga-nizing network (ASON), that have been used to explain emergenceof false memories61 can be used to model memes and formation ofconspiracy theories. A lot of information about memory distortionsfrom cognitive, psychiatric, neuropsychological, neurobiological,and sociocultural perspectives is in the book Memory Distortion,edited by D. Schacter.62ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis work started when I worked as Nanyang Visiting Professor in the School ofComputer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, andhas now been supported by the Polish National Science Center grant UMO-2016/20/W/NZ4/00354.REFERENCES6. Huth, A.G., Nishimoto, S., Vu, A.T., and Gallant, J.L. (2012). A continuoussemantic space describes the representation of thousands of object andaction categories across the human brain. Neuron 76, 1210–1224.7. Hopfield, J.J. (2007). Hopfield network. Scholarpedia 2, 1977.8. Dobosz, K., and Duch, W. (2010). Understanding neurodynamical systemsvia fuzzy symbolic dynamics. Neural Netw. 23, 487–496.9. Duch, W. (2019). Mind as a shadow of neurodynamics. Phys. Life Rev.31, 28–31.10. Seitz, R.J., Paloutzian, R.F., and Angel, H.-F. (2018). From believing tobelief: a general theoretical model. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 30, 1254–1264.11. St Jacques, P.L., Olm, C., and Schacter, D.L. (2013). Neural mechanismsof reactivation induced updating that enhance and distort memory. PNAS110, 19671–19678.12. Loftus, E.F. (2017). Eavesdropping on memory. Annu. Rev. Psychol.68, 1–18.13. Roediger, H.L., and Mcdermott, K.B. (1995). Creating false memories—remembering words not presented in lists. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn 21,803–814.14. Seitz, R.J. (2021). Beliefs: a challenge in neuropsychological disorders.J. Neuropsychol. https://doi.org/10.1111/jnp.12249.15. Douglas, K.M., Uscinski, J.E., Sutton, R.M., Cichocka, A., Nefes, T., Ang,C.S., and Deravi, F. (2019). Understanding conspiracy theories. Polit. Psy-chol. 40, 3–35.16. Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selfish Gene (Oxford Uni. Press).17. Gupta, A., and Ong, Y.-S. (2019). Memetic Computation: The Mainspringof Knowledge Transfer in a Data-Driven Optimization Era (Springer Inter-national Publishing).18. McNamara, A. (2011). Can we measure memes? Front. Evol. Neurosci. 3.https://doi.org/10.3389/fnevo.2011.00001.19. Heylighen, F., and Chielens, K. (2009). Evolution of culture, memetics. InEncyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science, B. Meyer, ed.(Springer), pp. 3205–3220.20. Gilboa, A., and Marlatte, H. (2017). Neurobiology of schemas and schema-mediated memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 618–631.21. van Kesteren, M.T.R., and Meeter, M. (2020). How to optimize knowledgeconstruction in the brain. Npj Sci. Learn. 5, 1–7.22. Shermer, M. (2007). Why People Believe Weird Things: Pseudoscience,Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time (Souvenir Press).23. Galli, G. (2014). What makes deeply encoded items memorable? Insightsinto the levels of processing framework from neuroimaging and neuromo-dulation. Front. Psychiatry 5, 61.24. Wimber, M., Alink, A., Charest, I., Kriegeskorte, N., and Anderson, M.C.(2015). Retrieval induces adaptive forgetting of competing memories viacortical pattern suppression. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 582–589.25. Kohonen, T. (2001). Self-Organizing Maps, 3rd, ext (Springer).1. Seitz, R.J., and Angel, H.-F. (2020). Belief formation – a driving force forbrain evolution. Brain Cogn. 140, 105548.26. Menon, V. (2011). Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: a uni-fying triple network model. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 483–506.2. Friston, K.J., Parr, T., and de Vries, B. (2017). The graphical brain: beliefpropagation and active inference. Netw. Neurosci. 1, 381–414.27. Ruppin, E. (1995). Neural modeling of psychiatric disorders. Network 6,635–656.3. Tse, D., Langston, R.F., Kakeyama, M., Bethus, I., Spooner, P.A., Wood,E.R., Witter, M.P., and Morris, R.G.M. (2007). Schemas and memoryconsolidation. Science 316, 76–82.4. Amit, D.J. (1992). Modeling Brain Function: The World of Attractor NeuralNetworks (Cambridge University Press).5. Huth, A.G., de Heer, W.A., Griffiths, T.L., Theunissen, F.E., and Gallant,J.L. (2016). Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that tile human ce-rebral cortex. Nature 532, 453–458.28. Sapolsky, R.M. (2017). Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best andWorst (Penguin Press).29. Duch, W. (2007). Towards comprehensive foundations of computationalintelligence. In Challenges for Computational Intelligence, 63, W. Duchand J. Mandziuk, eds. (Springer Studies in Computational Intelligence),pp. 261–316.30. Rissanen, J. (1978). Modeling by shortest data description. Automatica 14,465–658.12 Patterns 2, November 12, 2021Perspective31. Itti, L., and Baldi, P.F. (2006). Bayesian surprise attracts human attention. .Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 19 (MIT Press),pp. 547–554.32. Dawkins, R. (1999). The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of theGene (Oxford University Press).33. Lumsden, C.J., and Wilson, E.O. (1981). Genes, Mind, and Culture: TheCoevolutionary Process (Harvard University Press).34. Wilson, E.O. (1999). Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge (Reprint Edition)(Vintage).35. Gerstein, M.B., Bruce, C., Rozowsky, J.S., Zheng, D., Du, J., Korbel, J.O.,Emanuelsson, O., Zhang, Z.D., Weissman, S., and Snyder, M. (2007).What is a gene, post-ENCODE? History and updated definition. GenomeRes. 17, 669–681.36. Duch, W., Matykiewicz, P., and Pestian, J.(2008). Neurolinguisticlanguage processing with applications to medicalapproach to naturaltext analysis. Neural Netw. 21, 1500–1510.llOPEN ACCESS49. Pulvermuller, F. (2003). The Neuroscience of Language. On Brain Circuitsof Words and Serial Order (Cambridge University Press).50. Distin, K. (2005). The Selfish Meme (Cambridge University Press).51. Tyng, C.M., Amin, H.U., Saad, M.N.M., and Malik, A.S. (2017). The influ-ences of emotion on learning and memory. Front. Psychol. 8, 1454.52. Krpan, D. (2017). Behavioral priming 2.0: enter a dynamical systemsperspective. Front. Psychol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01204.53. Grossberg, S. (2012). Adaptive resonance theory: how a brain learns toconsciously attend, learn, and recognize a changing world. Neural Netw.37, 1–47.54. Grossberg, S. (2021). Conscious Mind, Resonant Brain (Oxford Univer-isty Press).55. Xu, R., and Wunsch, D., II (2005). Survey of clustering algorithms. IEEETrans. Neural Netw. 16, 645–678.37. Lamb, S. (1999). Pathways of the Brain: The Neurocognitive Basis of Lan-56. Fritzke, B., and Loos, H.S. (2017). DemoGNG 2.2. http://www.demogng.guage (J. Benjamins Pub. Co.).de/.38. G€ardenfors, P. (2004). Conceptual Spaces: The Geometry of Thought(MIT Press).57. Martinetz, T.M., and Schulten, K.J.networks. Neural Netw. 7, 507–522.(1994). Topology representing39. Fauconnier, G. (1994). Mental Spaces: Aspects of Meaning Constructionin Natural Language (Cambridge University Press).58. Martel, C., Pennycook, G., and Rand, D.G. (2020). Reliance on emotionpromotes belief in fake news. Cogn. Res. Princ. Implic. 5, 47.40. Fauconnier, G., and Turner, M. (2002). The Way We Think: ConceptualBlending and the Mind’s Hidden Complexities (Basic Books).41. Duch, W. (1997). Platonic model of mind as an approximation to neurody-namics. . Brain-like Computing and Intelligent Information Systems, Chap.20 (Springer), pp. 491–512.42. Babichev, A., and Dabaghian, Y.A.(2018). Topological schemas ofmemory spaces. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 12, 27.43. Op de Beeck, H.P., and Baker, C.I. (2010). The neural basis of visual objectlearning. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 22.44. Mitchell, T.M., Shinkareva, S.V., Carlson, A., Chang, K.-M., Malave, V.L.,Mason, R.A., and Just, M.A. (2008). Predicting human brain activity asso-ciated with the meanings of nouns. Science 320, 1191–1195.45. Binder, J.R., Conant, L.L., Humphries, C.J., Fernandino, L., Simons, S.B.,Aguilar, M., and Desai, R.H. (2016). Toward a brain-based componentialsemantic representation. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 33, 130–174.46. Sharot, T., Kanai, R., Marston, D., Korn, C.W., Rees, G., and Dolan, R.J.(2012). Selectively altering belief formation in the human brain. PNAS109, 17058–17062.47. Sporns, O., and Betzel, R.F. (2016). Modular brain networks. Annu. Rev.Psychol. 67, 613–640.48. McNamara, T.P. (2005). Semantic Priming. Perspectives from Memoryand Word Recognition (Psychology Press).59. Erwin, E., Obermayer, K., and Schulten, K. (1995). Models of orientationand ocular dominance columns in the visual cortex: a critical comparison.Neural Comput. 7, 425–468.60. (1995). COST action: comparative analysis of conspiracy theories(COMPACT). https://www.cost.eu/actions/CA15101/.61. van Dantzig, S., and Postma, E.O. (2004). A connectionist model of falsememories. Proc. 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,1375–1380.62. Schacter, D.L., Fischbach, G.D., and Coyle, J.T. (1997). Memory Distor-tion: How Minds, Brains, and Societies Reconstruct the Past (Harvard Uni-versity Press).About the AuthorsWlodzislaw Duch is the head of the Neuroinformatics and Artificial Intelli-gence group at Nicolaus Copernicus University, Toru(cid:1)n, Poland. He obtainedan MSc (1977) in theoretical physics; a PhD in quantum chemistry (1980); apostdoc at USC, Los Angeles (1980–1982); and a DSc in applied math(1987). He worked at the Max-Planck-Institute, Munich, Germany; NanyangTechnological University, Singapore; several places in Japan; and other coun-tries. He served as the President of the European Neural Networks Society, isan International Neural Network Society Fellow, and is a member of the high-level expert group of European Institute of Innovation & Technology (EIT). Hehas published over 360 peer-reviewed papers, co-authored six, and co-edited21 books. Search his name for details.Patterns 2, November 12, 2021 13