Artificial Intelligence ELSEVIER Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 Response Modelling creativity: reply to reviewers Margaret A. Boden University of Sussex, School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences, Brighton BNl 9QH, UK The reviewers of The Creative Mind (henceforth KM) interesting points. Most fall into seven groups: and P-creativity; distinction between H-creativity the mechanisms used for modelling creativity; AI-models as aids to creativity; and the treatment of music in TCM. I shall group my replies accordingly. have raised a host of the the role of the social context; specific computational the definition of creativity; role of evaluation; four Lovelace questions; the 1. Definition of creativity creativity. disagreement to considerable this was unavoidable: in Chapter 3 and Mozart spaces is often, and understandably, “exploratory”, I did not make Most of the reviewers point out, quite rightly, that my definition of creativity and “transformational” it sufficiently clear (despite my examples of of in Chapter 10) that mere exploration in TCM was vague. To some extent, the notion of positive value or interest, which is essential to the concept of creativity, cannot be given any general definition and is open in individual cases. But I should have been clearer about the differences between what I called “combinational”, instance, For Dickens conceptual of a space (conceptual or terrestrial) previously unsuspected, offer surprises comparable ty. Not all exploration does this, of course. But even simple induction-which, Roger Schank points out, explore a space with sometimes surprising (and valuable) results (TCM, Chapter 8). Most current AI-programs their conceptual spaces, but even so they may come up with apparently David Perkins remarks, however, creative process that were lying in surprising places. In short, it can creativi- as creative surprises. As the term applies in its richest sense with the involves changing the rules, not just working within them. to the surprises provided by transformational is the antithesis of transformational can sometimes show us regions counted as creative. Exploration and boundaries creativity+an transform explore rather than Also, I often used the distinction between a (superficial) (fundamental) transformation in a way that was intuitive 0004-3702/95/$09.50 SSDZ 0004-3702(95)00074-7 0 1995 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved tweaking and a than analytic. rather that from specializing transformed for granted the relevant to rings comprising I described Kekule’s move in aromatic and and pyridine. Thus change the (later) move A chemist ring-molecules instance) “place” tion patterns, within my scheme. Distinguishing not conceptual structured requires spaces but also on nature specific AI-processes. us to distinguish straightforward, this styles. such spaces, styles within individuating it depends of many benzene since conceptual space more string-molecules to ring-molecules fundamentally as a than five atoms. not all of which need be carbon. taking (for to compounds might see things differently, seeing In general. such as Schank’s the basic gulf as not it would lying between always be easy explana- heuristics tweaking for tweaking from not only on defining them. Because transformation the dimensions of the hierarchically is of is not a cut-and-dried matter, but 4, for example, space, which I described took several post-Renaissance centuries to explore Western music as a and which was Likewise. transformed of a number In Chapter single conceptual eventually consists (Bach. Vivaldi). contain many hierarchical ceptual work interest) those who discuss creativity it. is itself necessary theories fashion. spaces is highlighted jazz) and as chemistry) by the move of sub-spaces into atonal music. But (baroque music, this space undeniably sub-sub-spaces a scientific space (such or hypotheses, only some of which are The difficulty by work of judging the boundaries in the history of art and science, the novelty the creativity (both This difficulty of definition in general. including AI-workers who seek linked of distinct will usually in a clear con- yet such the and all bedevils to model to help us judge of the ideas under consideration. guilty, 1 plead problematic. However. stress on the hypothesis 4). I do not claim that precondition spaces. that animals happens play appears skilled behaviour. general: bead-game, without the piano). But to be essential as Kenneth only it. says true. The Turner restructuring, often scientific Grandpa’s scious problem-solving ideas in general, then. to the complaint I do not accept Scott Turner’s of representational redescription, that my definition charge of creativity was that I lay too much or RR (TCM, Chapter for the construction, In a recent publication it is the sole factor underlying and herself exploration, Karmiloff-Smith they (I cite relevant lack RR evidence because lack creativity in children says as much, [13]. Nor do I claim in adults learning creativity, transformation rather it is a that of conceptual the point is that it appears if the child Self-mapping of conceptual is to be flexible spaces form if we remarks, will be more fruitful in all children, imaginative to happen and is necessary follow and if we played than for creativity a map of in the the game Haase our explorations and claims that RR to read, or it and in his/her that creativity but to conscious, is not due to a “singular” process of conceptual incremental problem-solving processes. problem-solving types of example Turner modelled jokes? And Coleridge’s by Herb Simon These imagery? and his colleagues are not generated has in mind presumably processes. are produced I agree with Turner everyday by normal they, that processes: That include is the [14]. But by con- and creative is what that M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 163 conscious) change is not a question of a sudden Gestalt-switch, Chapter 10 (and much of Chapters 5 and 6) is about. In my account, conceptual restructuring but a focussed (sometimes in one or more dimensions of the pre-existing structure. So KekulC, for instance, did not “discard” his previous space: on the it into another, closely related, one. As I argue in TCM, contrary, he transformed if we were to discard our conceptual thinking something new, the novel would be neither valued nor preserved. thoughts would be unintelligible-so spaces whenever Turner says that my definition of creativity if we are to orient ourselves even in being dropped or negated: This leads me to hesitate also over Haase’s description of a radical conceptual change as one which throws out the lines and landmarks of the previous map and them with new ones. This may be very largely true, but some aspects of replaces intelligibly. the previous space need to be retained the obvious (Some aspects may be “retained” absence of an expected dimension can act as a reminder of it.) lays me open to the devil of to determinism. But he does not refer to Chapter 9, which was wholly addressed that my this problem. And he and Ashwin Ram ideas definition of transformational I explain in TCM (Chapter 1) that to say that leads to inconsistency. However, the idea before can be sensibly asserted only someone “could not” have produced to the space. If we try to apply this notion to a specific conceptual by reference entire resources of the person’s mind (or the computer’s program), of course we get an inconsistency. (and colleagues) in terms of apparently impossible complain creativity The same applies to computer programs. A program which uses (for example) heuristics [15], is changing its genetic algorithms, or AM’s concept-transforming the algorithms provided by space in significant ways. It could not do so without a set people-need the programmer; of general computational spaces that they deal with, to which we must implicitly refer when we speak of creativity. One might want to argue that some of these processes are domain-specific, so should be counted itself. This recalls Schank’s comment that the distinction between rules and meta-rules but that is just to say that computers-like is highly problematic. the domain-specific processes besides as lying within the conceptual space in Section 4 (below), in turn means Schank sees my definition as implying that creativity is a matter of degree. I am is not an all or none matter. But, very happy with that, if it means that creativity is multi- to say that creativity I prefer as explained dimensional-which to be the relevant dimensions need that specified in any argument about the “degree” of creativity of a given idea. For the is too same reasons, coarse in complex generative that the single distinction “creative” I agree with Haase inter-representational relations involved the computational not sufficiently assume representation, that my definition of creativity presupposes a particular account of mental life is perhaps prompted by the fact that I did In fact, I stress either exploratory creativity. and many different types of that new methods of inference are involved. And Ram’s comment types of process, or combinational that many different to describe systems. Ram’s complaint is well-taken. (such as those used for case-based enough reasoning) to enable At present, most cannot do so: they explore, can also lead to creative computer It representations. is difficult programs to their conceptual spaces. My hunch to come up with novel-and rather it will be even more of inference is that fruitful-forms control. to enable them note term (in minds or programs) But the enable generation, too. They “enabling” limit what structures are not mere here: Ram rightly notes that can be generated-but prohibitions, but positive their transform, and control novelty change than difficult and constraints they guidelines. on creative from ideas (leading me to ask how a resources the conceptual review, broadens related least Whereas my definition concentrated could have originated the discussions ideas and conceptual Perkins several not the notion system. The biological metaphor single novel structure present), covering his conceptual (Schank’s work on goals may “fitness” pressures) may shift unpredictably environment contains influence what counts other people, whose as adaptive explanation, Especially and alter. suddenly to creative systems-which spaces. 1 found much of interest changing gradually novelties of “adaptive” fits many But of adaptation instance). for arts, ones, because the values the criteria of (selection the system’s the to very different in judgments-and (see Section 4, below). even whims-may already I see as in a examples Perkins reminds us that striking novelty may emerge from mundane from life emphatic nings. He compares blind novelty emergence of complexity artificial despite in various ways development the gradualness growth problem-solving. historical work, ideas, This of novel of Darwin’s [5]. psychological biological and creativity with social processes. Many the emergence examples from simple processes are being modelled by work (Perkins mentions the Tierra system, for instance [20]), which- denials by some members In TCM I cited Howard ideas over many decades, of the A-life community--overlaps [S] study Gruber’s but did not sufficiently of this development. As Perkins as well as sudden not just requires subtle psychologizing, (conscious) but also careful says, we should consider and deliberate insights underpin- of adaptive of the in of AI the stress the slow sorts of difficulty the space. helpful of a given like Gruber’s. remarks search structured, Further difficulty must be complexly suffice. What locations discussion suggestive. “thickness” that a system will be “struck”. points would be very helpful modellers might landscapes. heuristics within rarity. the of I see them of interesting for overcoming adapt concern how to describe the inherent spaces of interest, simple search us from moving and hill-climbing and to new, from Perkins space. The search otherwise inhibit and how can oasis, they be best overcome? and isolation, as related results within a space. Some measure plateau intriguing to Haase’s problems questions or “liberated”, in understanding techniques on certain dimensions systems. creative used in A-life some of the he points out, would fruitful, Perkins’ are highly the about of the likelihood or at certain Possibly, AI- fitness to model domain-specific?) They would also need to define the four problems (domain-general? identified by Perkins. M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 165 (Likewise, influencing Perkins objects remain unchanged. is a difference between remain unchanged). But evolution clearly changes that my definition of creativity does not include evolution, because evolution does not change the rules. It is true that the most general rules, the basic GAS in variation and natural selection, an evolutionary program the the potential variation and selection at space, altering the constraints any given stage. There that can arise, and fish-genome. possibility-space emergence Similarly, painting “Guernica” about paint, war, guilt, and indecisiveness things. In other words, comparable the possibility of learn something if one wishes to do either of these in biology are the mutations and recombinations from a bat-genome of biological evolution less improbable and a the their appeared. the beginning. But precursors right from as their evolutionary sense, both bats and fish were within resources of the human mind include spaces (as Perkins himself suggests). taxonomic and morphological became the general and writing “Hamlet’‘-but In a highly abstract that can survive, one had better to conceptual the results categories 2. H-creativity and P-creativity The distinction between H-creativity sometimes and P-creativity in a way that obscures reviewers, example, Ram says that H-creativity implies ideas are a sub-class of P-creative terms of P-creativity ones. Similarly, Ram says that “most examples of H-creativity must in the end be explained read “all”: in terms of some individual’s P-creative act”. For “most”, here, “typically” it does not. However, p, 32), H-creative is taken up by several the fact that “H” implies “P”. For results from P-creativity, which in since H-creativity too, we have a necessary that occasionally is defined (KM, truth. in his/her individuals idea may be dependent This is not to deny (what is mentioned in various ways on the closely-related H-new other influences have been ignored within a single mind). They are not precluded to our understand- cooperation, ing of creativity. Even so, insofar as our question is the psychological query “How the answer can only be in terms of individual minds, did the functioning in TCM, Chapter 3) that the individual’s ideas of to date, such to model what’s going on of reference (it is difficult enough or distributed knowledge-bases, might contribute in varying degrees of independence. in principle: AI-models In AI-modelling idea arise?“, group. psychological for example, the everyday Both RAM and Schank suggest that the best research strategy in AI-modelling processes underlying P-creativity. is highlighted by Ram as a wide-ranging phenomenon is to focus on Analogy, which contributes reminding the central theme of Chapter 10 on “Elite or Everyman?“. Perkins’ psychological illustrations of the role of everyday experiments subjects did not come processes (TCM, p. 241) is a source of novel ideas too. I agree. Indeed, in creativity. Not surprisingly, his experimental in that chapter provide that this was and Schank significantly to creative thinking, shows cited 166 M.A. Boden ! Artificial Intelltgencc~ 79 (199.5) 161-182 that will go into the history books: experimental studies, barring are confined seems to believe, to P-creativity. Schank claims P-creative normal of scientific breakthroughs, insights, that an understanding that AI-modellers should ignore of creativity will from providing as Simon’s group do (Chapter rather than that I forget my own P/H distinction, in cases (as well as more mundane examples P-creative are necessarily and psychologists, to AI-researchers to model, or write a book about. creativity without would not be persuasive. Where Schank as also instances) through- too. Moreover, to the general addressing (like Ram) of creativity, we should the mechanisms up with any ideas extraordinary coincidences, It does not follow, as Schank of H-creativity. from modelling reconstructions examples come rational 8 of TCM; [14]). L‘k 1 ewise, he complains mentioning many H-creative out the book. But H-creative they are intriguing reader. To attempt any examples is correct focus of H-creativity that, first on everyday in modelling is in saying psychological the with reconstruction (in conjunction If this convincing rational better. But in the first instance. remarked cannot model Newton significant years ago, AI should processes shared by us all. data) of the “historical” input of famous H-historical in a the that is not necessary. As Seymour Papert human the superhuman if one fallacy: that one cannot model it does not follow results so much cases. at least. avoid or Shakespeare. aspects of the minds of lesser mortals. Questions about the “how” of H-creativity primarily concern is historical-sociological: it had arisen. 7” then social factors are not only these are not systematic, but highly contingent. hope sociological, for any systematic or historical. facts are relevant, facts are not all of the same individual minds, “Why was the idea but relevant, is of three not all of which can in fall explanation are so do not There That type, the honorific and the values used to ascribe “creative” and change unpredictably within social as we have seen. But if our question after greatly valued predominant. Moreover, as stressed why, H-creativity-whether reasons practice under to novel groups. for this: many non-psychological be discovered; in TCM. we cannot psychological, ideas differ any unifying societies. theory; across these This does not mean time. Many evidence creators. obstinate) damage, (Chapter someone’s Perkins studies, most recently certain motivational that psychologists who study H-creativity those of Howard Gardner and personality are are so determined are wasting [7], have typical (not factors it bluntly, most H-creators (not self-directed to say selfish) in highly unfortunate that they exploit, ways. As remarked that To put and those closest to them their found of H- to say and often in TCM to do with have at least as much lo), motivation ability stresses to H-create the importance and self-confidence as cognitive To be sure. the question in someone’s mind of psychodynamics, of how is distinct factors do. which cognitive it was possible from the question science has for a specific of what psychologist to decide in coming up with it-and to it. It is thus reasonable sticking to focus on the first question attention requires reminds us, the second rather also. the than (Compu- to arise ignored. idea largely creative motivated for a cognitive second. But, as Perkins the person M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 161 theories of motivation are still thin on the ground. The most interesting, is that developed by Aaron Sloman and Luc Beaudoin tational think, this theory cannot significantly enrich our commonsense depends on strong motivation.) I [l, 24]-but even intuition that H-creativity repeatedly over many years. As I remarked We also need to answer Perkins’ question as to why some people (Turing, for in TCM example) seem to H-create (p. 36), a P-creative idea which misses being H-creative only by some historical accident (missing the priority by a few weeks or months) is very good grounds for later. the person concerned will come up with H-creative a “bet” that “Turing’s work [for the award of his Fellowship] (Roger Lustig’s comment was H-creative restates my point.) thus merely However, to H-create over and over again is highly obscure. just what it is which enables someone for all practical purposes” ideas that ideas. This the difference so enabling creative this is a large part of what is going on when, as we say, the creator or expanded, that usually generate more mundane Ram suggests that in such individuals the usual search space may be interesting- thought using the very same ly different is intuitively mechanisms is partly a matter of extra constraints being plausible. Perhaps developed within the widely-known constraints: such additional distinctions would them. And allow for additional possibilities in exploring, perhaps is though spending years “acquiring domain expertise”-for (One example might be the musical “rules” not sufficient, for constant creativity. in TCM, Chapter 5.) characteristic of certain areas of Bach’s music mentioned (and even in general, As for P-creativity that specific ways of using and some neurophysiological) individuals [6]. But studies of generalizing concepts are characteristic of creative motivation, personality, can only take us so far: they can tell us nothing about why certain people, at certain times and places, decided that an H-novel idea was not only novel but also valuable. is considerable psychometric and conceptualization transforming, is necessary, suggesting expertise evidence there and involved that we replace Because of the unclarities ideas, Haase in identifying H-creative the binary P/H distinction with several analogues, suggests varying with the size of the community over which the novelty is defined. This is a helpful suggestion, which can contribute as well as our historical understanding. Detailed historical studies can sometimes distinguish distinct groups and sub-groups within what to the undiscriminating eye looks like (see [22] and Section 3 below). one scientific community to our psychological is dependent on human judgment An interesting example of a potentially in writing the program, is the human-computer Haase creativity Lenat, expected performance to EURISKO) about maximally divisible numbers, to be most focus on fruitful, rather creative “community” suggested by duo. As Haase points out, AM’s apparent in various ways. Not only did Doug insert the generative and evaluative heuristics he influenced AM’s ongoing thus leading the program that AM (and even ideas (minor theorems least in the present for example). But-at but he frequently them reports have come up with a few valuable H-creative than others. Lenat by “naming” some of its novel structures, 168 M. A. Boden I) Arbficiul Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 state of the art-the more the human “partner” to happen. Programmed sometimes from either human(s) or computer alone [4]. the more this is likely in various ways, leading to the generation of ideas that would probably not have arisen “agents” could help human creators is involved, and “novel”, Haase focusses on the embedding of creativity in various social contexts, and on I agree with motion across the boundaries between different spheres of novelty. (arrived at by some other reviewers also) that we need far more his conclusion in such a complex words than “creative” space. To arrive at a more powerful and discriminating vocabul- social-conceptual to study a wide range of ary for describing creative change, we shall need in spaces, each mapped examples drawn from different detail. It is an open question to what extent the same vocabulary will apply to all cases, but my bet would be that significantly different distinctions will need to be drawn in differing domains. to describe innovations conceptual (defined) 3. Social context The generative Several reviewers stress the importance of the social context-not only in the crucial evaluation phase. which decides whether the new idea is accepted and promulgated, but also in the generation phase itself. Ram, for instance, makes the important point that innovation often arises when ideas from one culture are applied in another. There are many historical examples of outbursts of creativity when new cultural groups (such as traders or refugees) come into a settled society. if we consider as examples, Maxwell’s peer-groups location links with continental physicists. A superb essay on the role of such social contexts in both the generation and the evaluation [22]. Schaffer shows of creative even of something as that take years of apparently theoretically the relevant scientific community. ideas is Simon Schaffer’s “Making Up Discovery” as the discovery of dinosaurs, may importance of the social context unproblematic informed biassed) negotiation within individuals. Ram mentions, in Cambridge and Faraday’s of a scientific “discovery”, the social construction (and nationalistically is also evident of expert to produce a computational model of culture. For instance, Ram points out that some social factors can be figured into the account without to ideas from the data-base by adding a different our being required produce computer modelling equivalents of the injection of unfamiliar other cultures would require us to enlarge to a conceptual connectionist the generative processes already available to the model would have to be powerful (general) enough to be able to structures as well as the “native” structures already work on these newly-added this provided. The more different would be. to the semantic network available system. But, for this to be fruitful, space, or additional entries the more difficult the cultures in question, The simulation of the sorts of peer-group negotiation described by Schaffer interchange would however be more difficult. It involves not only the cooperative M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) I61 -182 169 that ideas result. The role of evaluation of ideas to aid generation and modification of the nascent scientific discovery to some degree, competitive-evaluation question, but also the cooperative-and, of the is currently underplayed in AI-models of creativity, often being left implicit rather than made explicit as a separate on evaluation is, as yet, beyond the state of the art. So too is the phenomenon, taking a very long time to develop a creative idea. Ram mentions Maxwell’s taking nine the notion of electrostatic action, and one might add Darwin’s months to develop idea of evolution by natural selection, which took almost a lifetime to mature [g]. the model. To simulate in human creativity process within that are so important also mentioned by Ram, of someone’s the social agreements in 4. Evaluation The problem of evaluation nutshell by Ram, who remarks and its being interestingly novel is problematic. in assessing-and modelling-creativity is put in a that the distinction between an idea’s being novel As suggested in Section 3 above (and in Chapter 3 of KM), evaluation that can be affected by all sorts of intellectually extraneous fact social matter such as nationality, rivalry, illustrated by Gary Taylor’s [25] scholarly work on “the Shakespeare cited mentioned industry”, (p. 34), and also by Schaffer’s work on scientific discovery, and commercialism. in TCM fashion, above. This is a factors, is well recognize One may, of course, the strong social determinants therefore that I insulted Taylor by calling him a relativist. while also adopting certain evaluative criteria oneself. That necessarily have to accept relativism extent, a socially bestowed complaint relativist as an insult, nor name Taylor as a relativist. I deliberately relativist” cannot use the descriptive, art.) of evaluation is, one does not is, to a large puzzled by Lustig’s I did not use the term spoke of “the in pointing out that relativist critics of literature or science they accept only theories, or works of not evaluative, differences between scientific in its usual sense, because in agreeing (I am term “creative” that “creative” in general, honorific. Another difficulty identified by Ram lies in the fact that (as argued at length in thinking to special individuals, but are possessed by us all. It is therefore Chapter 10 of TCM) the psychological processes responsible are not unique unclear how to distinguish those thoughts which are creative from those which are In other words, even a given individual, not-in assessing the degree of P-creativity irrespective of past history. is problematic. for creative is largely correct. But I prefer This creativity, since to do so implies a continuous thoughts are to be ordered. To the contrary, creativity as continuous, others are not: certain structures simply cannot be generated particular of spectrum along which individual is that a main theme of TCM Some relevant dimensions are easily conceived of from if all the to avoid speaking of the “degree” spaces, for instance. But even is multi-dimensional. (untransformed) conceptual 170 M. A. Boden ! Anificrul Intelligrnce 70 (199_5) 161-182 large they were to a should continuous. one (or respects) are gloss attributions dimensions therefore, in which respect comparisons that would place ideas. Unless one is in the business of handing not matter may be misleading if one cannot decide which of two ideas (as well as socially unproductive) the thought the putative novelty, of creativity is creative. This would extent in relative is “more” to make out Nobel prizes or the like, the thinking and real work carefully requires I fully agree facing AI-modellers about terms more that we need a more precise the boundaries precise (and investigations of specific examples. loaded” Haase means “non-evaluative”. I cannot As I argued terms of the orthogonal. Ideally, specific involve detailed to a variety of other it does it Indeed, creative. the attempt. and less (and psychologists) interactions loaded) terminology, agree, however, in Chapter of of than and if by 3 of TCM, and as such the we is an essential aspect of our concept of creativity, in any reference ideas (granting creativity, evaluative require to or study of it. If we were to study merely that “new”, also, can be problematic), as this term criteria from is normally (of mathematical the chaff-an understood. Moreover, interestingness, evaluative distinction, for if [15]) to sort out the wheat that argues lies in spaces, or “novel”. Haase creativity conceptual “creative” many detailed “less positive is unavoidable generation would not be studying we should example ever there was one. evaluation of new still to deny that. of value would have been helpful is not This criterion kinds of value. His list of values life, as well as in science), kinds of goals and evaluative have no quarrel with nothing a sonata, does not cover. to do with explanation, or improvising that. But concerning as Schank focusses on explanatory remarks, more discussion the in TCM. There are, as he says, many (in everyday creativity theory of the and he says that we need a richly detailed I that may are other kinds of creativity, which have type of creativity. criteria there inform this or even with “reminding”. A musician a jazz-blues, is doing something which Schank’s composing account the “goal”, that becomes more well-specified Also, we need identify proceeds, to remember one, typically largely as a result of a dialectic sensibly thinking stages of thought. Lenat’s AM (which, by the way, to model creativity) AI-modelling of human To cap this feedback-led to capture creativity it all, we have is not yet adequate (well described to remember in informal attempts terms that evaluation in 191). even assuming that one can creative the as interaction with the successive is not a model of explanatory specification to some extent, the subtleties of this important but aspect able the third Lovelace place. Any AI-model (thus satisfying tive criteria accepted by people for coming up with creative shared open to change the same values within ideas+nly Haase’s reminders the domain of the cases of Mendel in these cases lies not only in how the new to recognize creativity question) would unavoidably and challenge of unpredictable kinds. can vary with in its own and others’ time and ideas be using evalua- that to the extent concerned. and McClintock ideas arose, but It could be tool even as a useful the people concerned are apt. The interest in why (as we now as a satisfactory model of creativity-r M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 171 they were not recognized involving not only the expected for many years as being valuable. The answers judge) scientific are complex, journals, concepts but also (for example) and prejudice the “possible against women. injustice [which] resonates powerfully with our own most basic experiences of not being understood”. This remark reminds us of the exceptionally strong motivation that must drive H-creators-partly to acquire the necessary expertise, and partly to persist in their own evaluation of their maverick lack of publication In this context, Haase mentions to maverick in widely-accessible resistance ideas. idea the conceptual described in As Schank reminds us, the person who encounters someone else’s creative they have already “internalized” may evaluate it largely because spaces and evaluative criteria of the creator. TCM (Chapter 7), for instance, the the human skills of automatic writer. This is partly why the third Lovelace question to the topic of computer creativity. To interpret sensibly, and to value acceptably, both require complex cognitive capacities. is provided by the interpretative semantic powers of In the haiku-program the “meaning” (non-existent) is relevant reader, not the and sometimes seemingly perverse, The impossibility of a scientific theory of evaluation in the dress . . .” ), and baroque complexity may be preferred in general (because values reasons) does can change for unpredictable, not rule out that some values may be very common, or even the possibility universal. Criteria of symmetry and simplicity, for example, are commonly used in the valuation of works of art or scientific theories. To be sure, some degree of asymmetry and disorder are often welcomed (think of Robert Herrick’s poem on “A sweet disorder over classical order. But that symmetry and simplicity are so often judged in very general relevant may be grounded processing. Similarly, some people argue for the “biophilia hypothesis”, that humans share universal aesthetic preferences grounded for instance, certain types of landscape, and even tree-shape, appear to ancestry: living in vastly different be favoured by people is hampered by terrains [lo]. Identification of shared evaluative biasses, however, may be swamped by strong cultural the fact that these are only tendencies-which influences. to make us insist that they should be included as a matter of course in AI-models of human creativity. information claiming in our evolutionary In other words, even if they exist at all they are not strong enough from vastly different facts about human societies, to be 5. The four Lovelace questions The four Lovelace questions itemized in Chapter 1 are: LQ-1. Can computational creativity? concepts and models help us to understand human LQ-2. Could a computer comparable to human creativity? at least appear to be creative, its performance being 171 M.A. Boderr Artificml Imelligenrr 79 (I 99.5) lhl- 18.2 LQ-3. Could a computer of other systems)? appear to recognize creativity (in its own ideas, or those LQ-4. Could apparently grammer)? a computer be “really” (as opposed to merely producing creative performance is wholly due to the pro- creative whose originality I am therefore bemused this computers address of whether questions book. As for LQ-4, preceding lies outside apparent-creativity theories helpful chapters the main by Turner’s can be creative”. issue, claim that I do not address the three of last The and LQ-2 and LQ-3 are discussed this is discussed because, at length as a philosophical issue (LO-1 ): whether in computer models in Chapter rather the concepts can help psychologists 11. I “sideline” and processes underlying formulate to than a scientific question, about human creativity. “the question four Lovelace the throughout it in the it A further it that philosophical concern cal implications are they and confuse them, computer”, must be more reason is an extremely for delaying consideration question, of LQ-4 until at involving the final chapter was of least four argument. complex As outlined brain-stuff. consciousness, semantically in Chapter 11 of TCM, empty programs, these and types arguments the practi- of human community. Each of these arguments is controversial, to a large degree that in claiming independent if one accepts of each other. Turner the naturalist and if computers cannot just a physical mechanism. than in theory be creative, then seems view of “mind to as the human mind Functionalism--or “mind as computer program, brain as computer”-is views of the mind/brain. and is philosophically for example, that consciousness cannot terms. In TCM true. including it is not enough creativity, (pp. 278-281) to render of our neuroscientific understand irrelevant. The “perhaps” is ignorance, but primarily the concept of consciousness at the just contro- be captured that I argue computational this may perhaps argue, or computational, one of many naturalist versial. Many people in functionalist. although of human theories needed here not merely because because we do not yet sufficiently philosophical level. be conscious cannot human mind/ brain must be partly psychology, (and be In view of this unclarity, we cannot be sure that if consciousness is necessary for creativity) if computers then the supra-physical. naturalist To take John Searle the (as-yet unknown) views of mind/brain do not just one example. well-known accept to [29] sees the mind as a natural properties are not possessed by metal that Searle offers no argument and be true), that his associated can support mentality. “mind as computer the AI-community: product of the brain, the and of brain-stuff which underlie mental 11 (pp. (which may obvious in Chapter I show and silicon. for this empirical hypothesis it is intuitively and silicon that cannot-is the brain allows that is more some claim-that whereas metal false. However, neither Searle nor I wish to claim just a physical mechanism. Moreover. Searle explicitly Some program”. philosopher claims that processes 271-273) conceivably that neuroprotein certainly than M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 173 in principle, produce performance computer behaviour Shakespeare “for” or “against” computers being creative the four Lovelace questions. could, of people. This covers all cases of human creativity, the same as the including and Beethoven. Whether Turner would take this to be an argument is unclear, as he does not distinguish precisely fourth argument to accord moral and epistemological type of philosophical (TCM, pp. 281-284) has nothing as against regarding computers The to do with whether or not the mind/ creative it concerns an essentially brain is “more than just a physical mechanism”. Rather, status moral-political decision about whether as we all do to other human beings (though Nazis did not do to to computers, Jews, nor slave-owners to slaves), and as some humans do also to some animals. Just as the case for treating animals with respect or compassion does not depend so the on, or imply, the view that animals are more than physical mechanisms, status to computers would not decision imply as to regard computers creative, implications, claiming that human brains are not purely physical mechanisms. to accord some moral or epistemological so as to avoid certain practical this either. Conversely, someone who refuses is not thereby (moral) “unless in a philosophy Whereas Turner accuses me of ignoring the question whether computers can be creative (let us assume he means “really” creative, as in LQ-4), Schank complains that I have wasted too much space on it. He says the question has no practical I importance agree. This is why, as explained above, I postponed LQ-4 until the final chapter. But it does not follow that it should not be discussed at all. Quite apart from its intrinsic interest (and the regularity with which it is raised by people outside AI), from the first LQ-4 needs to be discussed in order three Lovelace questions. sometimes it with the others. confuse seems class”. Science-fictional even AI-professionals In my experience, Schank himself scenarios apart, the evaluative to demonstrate that, because its difference to assume no answer to LQ-4 can be given. But the evaluation of creativity to some philosophical is inescapably subjective attributions of creativity creativity), irrelevant argument, TCM, pp. 281-284). saying that I agree with Searle (whose views Schank rejects). TCM I make it clear that I do not. The point, here, claims relating to it, require philosophical consideration. arguments about In resisting Schank’s dismissal of LQ-4, I am not In Chapter 11 of is that LQ-4, and Schank’s it (such as the “non-human” aspect of (there being no “acid test” for is in an AI-model I agree with Schank that people do not always fully understand each other, so is unfair. I agree, too, that is not an all-or-none matter. But it that to insist on perfect understanding (as noted on page 278 of TCM) understanding does not follow that a purely behavioural criterion of understanding the students to Schank that his programs understand clearly do embody a degree of understanding. This does not follow. His students could be wrong, programs to some degree. He concludes tells us that his educational in two different ways. their questions is acceptable. are felt by First, they may mistakenly attribute capacities to the user-friendly system which in fact, possess (but which some more advanced program might it does not, possess). Early mistakes have argued elsewhere not be overdone, non-specialist human users. of this kind with respect to ELIZA were legion, [2, pp. 463-472 lest this sort of over-trusting and 496-4971 attitude that user-friendliness be uncritically adopted I and should by Second, Schank ignores all the philosophical controversy the place (myself of understanding. to rehearse these arguments. included) do not accept We would be mistaken, table, as opposed to a computer whose passing to a set of systematic concerning the Turing it must But the Turing Test as in for example, the Turing Test was due to and interacting generative the domain to that domain- in a novel notion unconnected in any way with be termed it prompted a ‘*creative ” contribution someone else to see the connections.) into believing The that his program can be “fooled” irrelevant. look-up (thankfully) criterion understanding Test. This is not be said that most philosophers an adequate attributing a giant processes. question even fact understands could not properly if, as a matter of fact, students that Schank’s is therefore them (Similarly, Schank might counter this argument creativity) things. Up to a point. by pointing to his claim that AI-models about how humans need not fit our intuitions I agree: some of our intuitions may be wrong; of (and computers) might be different. But that are wholly irrelevant. look-up in TCM (pp. 104-l table. mentioned creative in proving no transformation involves of the visual understanding to One example above. Another is not showing the is by several equal” space of 2D- and 3D-space “base-angles of the conceptual the lo), and mentioned is the is not because are not its method This program (nor any analogue (understanding, these in any event, Martians that internal mechanisms the giant discussed thinking achieve and say they geometry-program reviewers. theorem, of geometry possessed In his mechanistic question” ers, such as computational who are convinced psychological only I therefore positions which many AI-researchers that by Euclid final paragraph. explanation that understanding to the converted. they are doing and Pappus). so. Schank of creativity says ‘the is possible. right question isn’t whether it’s how”. But for whom‘? My book was aimed not only at AI-workers a right “the and sympathiz- of people the to psychologists, computer models must but at the far wider audience of human creativity. to argue had take for granted. be utterly That for controversial irrelevant is. I was not preaching philosophical realizing perhaps without When Schank says “If progress is to be made in modeling human capabilities the focus must be on research strategies discussions”, is why Chapters 1 agree with him-provided 5-8 of TCM focus specifically offer definitions the relevant AI-research. too. and examples But the philosophical to be used (One point made in Chapter in AI, not on “the main he means on AI work, and why for as background discussion in Chapters 9 is that, contra Schank, does not consist only phenomena in finding predictive “laws of nature”: intelligible. by showing how they are possible, it seeks to how they l-4 as creativity, such philosophical focus”. That Chapters considering 9 and 11 is necessary science make natural are structured, and how they are related.) M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 175 6. Specific computational mechanisms Many examples of computational mechanisms are mentioned in the reviews, and in TCM itself. Here, I shall focus on just a few. is case-based reasoning, discussed One promising example in his work on story-generation). in Ram’s review (and used by Turner I see this work as lying within the tradition of heuristic problem-solving described by George Polya [19]. Ram focusses on how we can-and and reformulate problems, and how we can adapt old solutions to new problems. This adaptation may require us to combine past solutions or experiences, which in turn demands powerful methods of storage and access. how AI-models might be able to-analyze the jargon, To illustrate the subtle problems facing us here, let me give an example. Some years ago, I was marking a pile of philosophy dissertations. Several were on a topic: the nature of representa- highly abstract, and much-discussed, philosophical tion. The essays stated the problem, defined laid out the competing philosophical positions, provided citations to the specialist literature, and attempt- also, so ed a summary evaluation of the various positions. So far, so good-but formatted boring. Then I came upon a dissertation like a theatrical script. There Piglet, Rabbit, and Christopher Robin. were four characters: Winnie-the-Pooh, in plain language and simple sentences, The characters to each other chatted and the like. In fact, without this mentioning various homely topics-honey-pots, each being explicitly stated, it against the one putting forward a coherent philosophical position and defending objections the different the positions “fitted” of the others. And, amazingly, for instance, was the bluff personalities of these familiar fictional friends (Pooh, the author got commonsense a First. But more access, comparison, analogy between A.A. Milne’s nursery-world controversy. constructively developing-the and a convoluted philosophical realist, Rabbit the devotee of formalism). Naturally, they were discussing the nature of representation, the mechanisms in noting-and and control here are indexing, involved relevant of if is well-taken. However, I suspect that this AI-work Ram’s insistence that case-based reasoning normally involves multiple processes is more useful in interacting theory the than in practice. In other words, Ram’s work can help us to understand sort of psychological processes going on in my student’s mind when he wrote his reasoner might even be able to mimic this dissertation. Some future case-based specifically particular dimensions were relevant example, provided by the programmers, pro- grams, such as BACON, normally have the creative insight implicitly coded in the initial formulation of the problem.) But whether an AI-program could generate is another matter, about which I am such creative comparisons is just too great, and too diverse. highly sceptical. The knowledge-base are wasting their time. As not If the in Chapters 9 and 11, science aims for understanding, This is not to say that Ram and other AI-researchers or even for detailed post hoc explanation. (As Haase points out, current “creative” spontaneously conceptual prediction, involved not-or the I noted necessarily-for processes of conceptual comparison and control implemented in AI-programs 176 M.A. Boden ArrIficud Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 help us to see, considerable many people in general terms, how human performance is possible, that is a advance. assume This is especially true of areas such as creativity, where that no scientific account can ever be given. The same caveat to Schank’s work on explanation patterns (another applies reasoning). He mentions some helpful general to less familiar cases. But it’s not clear link Pooh and Piglet to distinct theories of representation. for heuristics to me how these He to reverse-engineer for creativity in in saying that we are not seeking looking for AI-models that could account I am uneasy at Schank’s of ill-understood claim that probably 90% of P-creativity is the creative or anomalous phenomena in one’s world. It was to of the very wide range of (explanatory and non-explanatory) I deliberately novels, referred needlework, in TCM to a host of dissimilar sarcasm, choreography, painting, to the explanat- is well-suited even advertising. Schank’s approach to the others. too, at Schank’s creativity the exploration account is, in my terms, of my discussion of connectionism combinational creativity. in It is from and from analogizing which transformation relies on the comparison of structured conceptual of conceptual and even familiar patterns form of case-based adapting heuristics might admits actual cases, but merely principle. as much himself, explanation readers remind human creativity examples: music, poetry. car-mechanics, ory cases, but not I am uneasy, that 6. Associative Chapter thus different spaces, structures. by symbolic systems, (natural-language processes that associative But I do think from “The Ancient Mariner” terms. That in connectionist I do not claim that it cannot be modelled unconscious do that constantly). selected 64s more naturally modelled to connectionism cannot model included, systems Schank’s such as we see in the examples Chapter appealing that apparently approach whose some-examples is a significant critic literary the behavior and fall through features we normally resemblance (Livingston of connectionist Lowes) concerning systems.) “as a general-purpose the cracks of symbolic net to catch thoughts rule-based models”, seem to reflect what may be going on regard as creative. the between intuitions (I think it interesting of a poet (Coleridge) of associative memory, the nature nor that such processors, creativity- discussed in is, I am not and ideas but as an in some-only that there and a Of course, connectionism is not magic. Moreover, as Schank points out, the systems decide on the features the phonetic Wickelgren for example, in effect, an analysis of the task-domain learning designers In NetTALK, of connectionist provided, to take place human to be coded. by the input-layer successful with Schank, when he says that we might benefit Minsky’s Also, associative the stanza-structure to force all examples of “The Ancient Mariner”. in mind. in Chapter and structuring 6. we need (171 society as I argue of creative processes thinking [21]. And current in creativity-for connectionism from implementing to understand interplay the example, between and In other words, we should not try box. Schank’s the imagery into one computational or sub-features features coded that enabled I agree ideas such as is crude. M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 177 I do not see how this approach would apply productively Birnbaum-Collins is helpful, but that is largely because application of the (non-connectionist) insight about benzene relatively goal-directed. to the examples of Coleridge’s that connectionism, Schank’s comment relatively low-level processes and pattern-recognition, But I wouldn’t (and others normally don’t) call Coleridge’s word that suggests a much more goal-directed, as we know imagery cited in Chapter 6. In short, I agree with for insight. but not for creative is suitable it now, problem-solving images “insights’‘-a approach. [27] model to Kekule’s the KekulC case was Haase remarks that we need a better understanding of how to “liberate” our from the confines of the initial representation we gave them. This is the most difficult question of all. Heuristics for tweaking and transform- spaces have been implemented by a number of AI-workers, but in any event are usuahy in the sort of way that Haase (and Schank) complains of. There are and programs perhaps ing conceptual the “transformations” prefigured two problems here: how to make (sometimes how transformations with structure-specific at each generation would be done by the program, not the human being. fundamental than heuristics. But AI-researchers will hope that the selection are more likely to arise with the use of genetic algorithms they have been made. Arguably, transformations, fundamental) fundamental, them, once to evaluate are not and even Moreover, that, we-r if the system to random mutation) (as opposed the GA-system is self-evaluating, we shall probably find that is needed. And to plausible-generate-and-test to decide what counts as incorporate plausible. in Chapter 1 was, in effect, a skit on the use of genetic algorithms. But the human because he swapped whole phrases poet was using plausible generate-and-test: (not individual words) from line to line, all but one of the final lines were, though strange, potentially meaningful. In TCM (p. 213) I point out that the ARTHUR poem quoted itself-have 7. AI-models as aids to creativity In TCM, as Ram and Schank point out, I was concerned more with how is possible than with what guidance can make it more probable. Some in Chapter 10, and Seymour Papert’s LOGO-led remarks were made there, about I for creativity relevant stress on exploration and self-analysis was noted. But I said nothing, how current AI-models of creativity might be used to help the human creator. have recently argued creativity that such models could provide programmed “agents” [4]. able to function Such agents (program-parts could involved in the relevant conceptual space, help the human to learn the constraints that space. They could suggest and identify and also help him/her differences, of varying degrees of subtlety, between familiar ideas and novel ones. The evaluation would be the responsibility of the human being, as is the case for and example [23,26]. Together, in evolutionary independently) to explore computer relatively graphics human 17x machine alone, M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 can create and which novel that in some cases are valued structures the human sufficiently could not have generated to be sold in art-galleries. that-in Sometimes, way in which is illustrated shows arithmetical Kekule’s visual we are to use AI-agents exploring, representations solution. and creative notes, is presented masks as Perkins the problem in TCM (pp. 103-104) this case-visualization solutions are hard those solutions by the two-houses-and-string But visual imagery case (see especially Chapters tends to block the can sometimes 4 and 10). As Ram in current AI-models of problem-solving to find because the in specific ways. This example, which simple) as in the rarity of If (exceedingly be very helpful, remarks, is unfortunate. as aids to our own creativity, agents capable of building, transforming visual representations as ways of helping intuition and anecdote. some of Papert’s been [ 181. So Schank’s-intuitively questioned confident claims by psychologists AI-models rely only on lo), have In recommending ever, we must not (Chapter LOGO perimentation will enable checked empirical wanting which approaches, significant ways [3. Introduction].) by psychological psychologists, (most or all) students not creativity to understand though highly to become experimentation. seek to supplant need to learn dissimilar may how- in TCM uses of ex- will be needed. or teaching As creativity, I note the pedagogical the basis about on plausible-+laim (consistently) AI-workers them. from a variety complement need (More of careful that his programs more creative must be to cooperate with people generally, 8. Music in TCM One review, by Lustig, amateurism. musicologist, is very different review professional musical and very much ill-tempered which he fails to take proper he ignores text. general In addition, audience. than less is largely devoted in from tone he the others, to TCM’s treatment and much irritated His irritation, is understandably however, by my self-declared has led him into a less than careful, attack on a researcher whom generous, reading of my book-and I praised. There an at of the spirit, and even of the letter, of my for a involved into also are many points constraints in writing account the rhetorical His remarks because precisely say of the Romantic”, use of the lower-case the disputes between the book”. gift restricted (which lengthy is why historical on the history of Romanticism, this history I know is diverse two popular attitudes, not “They for example, and complex the are called but rather “I call them the inspirational and the romantic” “r” was deliberate. individual Romantics, So too was my decision therefore who It is are irrelevant. to that I was careful the and inspirational (p. 4). My to not to refer “are never named in is a that creativity view I was concerned with to an elite. Although the word), I used today’s widely popular this view has roots it would have been in the Romantic movement inappropriate to offer a disquisition on Romanticism. of psychological each other in of music. Lustig’s less helpful. AS a M.A. Boden I Artifkial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 179 for the general public, It would have been inappropriate also to pepper I chose to keep references for whom the text, here and elsewhere, to a minimum because I was with scholarly references. writing and references might be off-putting. Since I took pains to mention as wide a range of that Lustig demands would have examples as possible, filled many pages. Perhaps Lustig believes such rhetorical constraints should not that professional academics should write only scholarly tomes for the be accepted, Ideas delectation of other professional to that are potentially of interest them, not kept within the ivory tower of academia. to the general public should be communicated If so, I profoundly disagree. the paraphernalia the “complete” of footnotes academics. endnotes to Mozart I chose Mozart (as also to Kekult) that I am “determined in almost every chapter, Lustig’s lack of attention In my experience, Mozart (written or verbal) of creativity (or scientist) would have done. referred to remind the reader is the composer most commonly mentioned that there are many different sorts of questions to the rhetorical demands I faced also underlies his to plead Mozart’s case at any cost”. I am not. I charge in deliberately order to be asked about any individual H-creator. For this purpose, any well-known com- poser for five reasons, which the rhetorical structure of my book rather than the specifics of his music. concern in in general, so is likely to cross the discussions in reader’s mind anyway. Second, terms, which Chapter 1 explicitly glossed Mozart’s creativity was useful for my argument. Third, Mozart is someone whose work has been very differently valued at different (in Chapters 3 and 10) about of H-creativity. Fourth, he was a child to various questions about nature and nurture raised in prodigy, which is relevant Chapter 10. And fifth, an oft-cited “letter” purporting to be in Mozart’s hand is probably a forgery, which enabled me to show (in Chapter 10) how people who do plead his case may muddy the waters in respect of the nature of creativity. (I forebore of which has this “letter” on trust: I have no received enormous attention-that wish to point out other writers’ mistakes just to make them look foolish.) then, and I forebear now, to name two recent books+ne times, which supports my remarks of “Amadeus” mentioned the social construction in “inspirational” the interpretation have taken that As for the fact judgment this was not my own the comparison between Mozart and Haydn on page 253, Lustig’s criticism again betrays careless reading. As his own quotation shows, I explicitly some flagged musicians say . . . “), and I took care also neither to endorse nor to deny it, since I to do so. This purpose of this passage was to make the point am not competent that this specific pair of composers) and admire greatly, tion. I have acknowledged this general point clearer earlier on in the book. But pouring scorn on my lack of since I took care not to claim is inappropriate, musical expertise about Mozart any. (whether in other words, that much of what we call “creative”, than transforma- such a comparison is intelligible: is-in my terminology-exploration that I should have made (in Section 1, above) justified or not (“I have heard rather for Since I make no claim to musical expertise, Lustig’s (almost equally scornful) criticisms of Longuet-Higgins. I cannot comment on most of I suspect, 180 M.A. Boden : Artificial Intelligence 79 (I 995) 161- 182 that Lustig is forgetting theory of tonality, that Longuet-Higgins’ is to offer a is well aware of in which fifths (and octaves) can identify all the however, psychologically plausible analysis of harmony. Longuet-Higgins the received intervals. But this is a purely analytic identification. this analysis would mean that in order to recognize a major third (which he says is certain passages), one would have to go up by a fifth essential four thirds as a dimension of his (psychological) harmonic space. times, and then down two octaves. He therefore Interpreted psychologically, in understanding adds major aim space. Lustig implies that, as such, it is irrelevant As I point out in TCM, Longuet-Higgins’ work on Bach is not intended as a In my terms, it counts as theory of musical creativity, but of musical perception. “mapping” a representational to creativity: “What are we to do with this particular map? . . . How will we arrange the exploration of a (non- it to be musically creative?“. But this is to ignore transformed) musical space. For the purposes of computer modelling, someone has to define it. Longuet- the space before anyone can explore or transform Higgins’ work has been used (for example) as the basis of a model of jazz improvisation described in TCM [ 11,12]. reference The charge to first principles that my statement that Longuet-Higgins’ is “bluster” is it. Lustig assumes, mistaken, as is the charge that I “blithely accept and repeat” that Longuet-Higgins based with his usual lack of generosity, of harmonic space on “first principles” was based merely on my his representation noticing his use of that phrase in the final sentence of the relevant paper. On the also on my familiarity with Longuet- contrary, my statement was grounded Higgins’ writings on a wide topics, and on various lectures and informal conversations over many years. His belief that unpublished psychological concerned with music, language, vision, or any- thing else-should analysis of the abstract structure of the task is made explicit papers [16]. His description of his work on harmony with the rest of his psychological work (which is scrupulously start with what David Marr [28] called a “computational” in several of his is thus entirely consistent range of psychological free of bluster). theory-whether from his music by Longuet-Higgins, them when composing his fugues. But whoever claimed One last example: Lustig complains that it is absurd to suggest that Bach knew or that he of the musical rules extracted thought about that he did? Not I, and certainly not Longuet-Higgins. What Longuet-Higgins was trying to do was to identify certain musical structures characteristic of (some of) Bach’s music, and to define procedures whereby these structures could be perceived by a listener. Just as we are not (usually) consciously aware of following rules when we language, so we are not (usually) conscious of following musical rules. understand lie Many aspects of and understanding the beyond conscious access. One could, of course, raise questions about whether procedures are plaus- ible models of what actually goes on in the (conscious or unconscious) mind. Indeed, Longuet-Higgins himself does so (as I point out on page 92 of TCM), in saying that parallel-processing though not in his program. But Lustig does not appear is involved in human perception, and symbolic representations defined by Longuet-Higgins to be asking that question. musical-generation linguistic-and M.A. Boden I Artificial Intelligence 79 (1995) 161-182 181 My disappointment at Lustig’s review lies in the lost opportunity for construc- I would tive discussion and development have been very interested to know what a musicologist might say about various detailed aspects of Longuet-Higgins’ work on fugue (discussed in Chapter 5), or on jazz (Chapter 6). A refusal to address these issues, whether Johnson-Laird’s approaches or because of because of an unargued scepticism about computational is unhelpful. them, the musical amateurism of the author reporting of the musical examples I presented. 9. Conclusion Ram and colleagues have offered an excellent summary of our problem. They say that the main interrelated pieces of the creativity puzzle are: inference and the change. control of inference, knowledge I representation, agree. And Perkins has offered a pertinent the Gordian knot of creativity is a nest of knots within knots. reminder, and warning: and representational in AI. Others must be tackled by philosophical Some of these knots have already been loosened by AI-ideas, and may one day analysis, The set of four Lovelace to cut the Gordian knot of computer- need in psychology, philosophy, history of art and science, research, or psychological experimentation. is a conceptual knife designed into four stands, to be unravelled be untied by work historical questions creativity to cooperate with colleagues and even musicology, if they are to find their way within this nest of knots. in different ways. AI-researchers References [l] L.P. Beaudoin and A. Sloman, A study of motive processing and attention, in: A. Sloman, D. Hogg, G. Humphreys, D. Partridge and A. Ramsay, eds., Prospects for Artificial Intelligence (10s Press, Amsterdam, 1993) 229-238. [2] M.A. Boden, Artificial Intelligence and Natural Man (Basic Books, New York, 2nd ed. expanded, 1987). [3] M.A. Boden, ed., Dimensions of Creativity (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, in press). [4] M.A. Boden, Agents and creativity, Commun. ACM 37 (7) (1994) 117-121; Special Issue on Agents (D. Riecken, ed.). [5] M.A. Boden, The Philosophy of Artijkial Life (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994). [6] H.J. Eysenck, The measurement of creativity, (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994) 199-242. in: M.A. Boden, ed., Dimensions of Creativity [7] H. Gardner, The Creators of the Modern Era (Basic Books, New York, 1993). [8] H.E. Gruber, Darwin on Man: A Psychological Study of Scientijic Creativity (Wildwood House, London, 1974). [9] A. Harrison, Making and Thinking: A Study of Zntelligent Activities (Harvester Press, Hassocks, Sussex, 1978). [lo] J.H. Heerwagen and G.H. Orians, Humans, habitats, and aesthetics, in: S.R. Kellert and E.O. Wilson, eds., The Biophilia Hypothesis (Shearwater Press, Washington, DC, 1993) 138-172. [ll] P.N. Johnson-Laird, The Computer and the Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Science (Fontana, London, 1988). J.G. Carbonell (Tioga. Palo Alto. CA, 1983). 182 M.A. Boden i Artificial Intelligence 79 (1095) 161-182 [12] P.N. Johnson-Land, and West 291-326. I. Cross, improvisation: Jazz eds., Representing Musical Structure a theory at the computational (Academic level, in: P. Howell, R. 1993) Press, London, [ 131 A. Karmiloff-Smith. Beyond Modulurity: A Ikvelopmental Perspective on Cognitive Science [I41 1151 lY92). (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. P. Langley. H.A. Simon. G.L. Bradshaw Exp/orations of the Creative Process (MIT Press. Cambridge. MA, 1992). D.B. Lenat, Michalski, and T.M. Mitchell, and J.M. Zytkow, role of heuristics learning The in by discovery: in: R.S. eds.. Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence studies, Three case Scientific Discovery: Computational New Press, lY85). Men& of life. computer programming, to the Synthesis and T. Sejnowski. in: C.G. Langton. C. Taylor. eds., Artificial Life II (Addison-Wesley, and Schuster, New York. effects of learning f’roces~es: Srudie.s in Cognitive Science (MIT Press, Cambridge, Approach H.C. Longuet-Higgins. MA, 1987). M.L. Minsky. Vie Society o/ Mind (Simon R.D. Pea and D.M. Kurland, On the cognitive fdeas Psycho/. 2 (lY84) 137-16X. G. Polya, How To Solve It: A New Aspect of Mrrthemntrcul Method (Princeton University Princeton, NJ, 1945). T.S. Ray, An approach and S. Rasmussen. C. Rosenberg Syst. 1 (1987) 145-168. S. Schaffer, Making up discovery, m M.A. Boden. Cambridge, MA. K. Sims, Artificial A. Sloman, Motives, mechanisms. Artificial Intelligence (Oxford University G. Taylor, Reinventing Shukespeare S. Todd and W. Latham, L. Birnbaum Annual Conference of the Cognifive Science Society. Boulder. CO (1984) 124- 127. D.C. Marr. Visiorl: A Computational lnvestigution into the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Informution J.R. Searle. Minds. brains. J. Doyne Farmer Redwood City, CA, 1992) 371-408. English to pronounce graphics. Computer Graph. 25 (4) (19Y2) 319-328. eds., Dimensions of Creativity (MIT Press. in: M.A. Boden. 1990) 231-247. Evolutionary Art und Computers Beho\, Brain Sci. 3 (1980) 417-424. lYY4) 13-52. evolution and G. Collins. Opportunistic 1990). (Academic Parallel networks Press. London, Press, London, Press, Oxford, San Francisco. and emotions, and programs. and Freudian for computer CA. 1982). text, Complex that learn (Freeman. (Hogarth planning 1992). ed.. The Philosophy of in: Proceedings Sixth slips. [Jbl (171 1181 ll’j’l WI 1211 PI [231 1241 1251 P’4 1271 PSI WI 