Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700www.elsevier.com/locate/artintOn principle-based evaluation of extension-basedargumentation semantics ✩Pietro Baroni, Massimiliano Giacomin ∗Dipartimento di Elettronica per l’Automazione, Università di Brescia, Via Branze 38, I-25123 Brescia, ItalyReceived 13 November 2006; received in revised form 3 April 2007; accepted 16 April 2007Available online 29 April 2007AbstractThe increasing variety of semantics proposed in the context of Dung’s theory of argumentation makes more and more inadequatethe example-based approach commonly adopted for evaluating and comparing different semantics. To fill this gap, this paperprovides two main contributions. First, a set of general criteria for semantics evaluation is introduced by proposing a formalcounterpart to several intuitive notions related to the concepts of maximality, defense, directionality, and skepticism. Then, theproposed criteria are applied in a systematic way to a representative set of argumentation semantics available in the literature,namely grounded, complete, preferred, stable, semi-stable, ideal, prudent, and CF2 semantics.© 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Keywords: Argumentation frameworks; Argumentation semantics; Skepticism1. IntroductionInterest and vitality of AI-related research in argumentation theory are witnessed, among other factors, by theincreasingly rich variety of argumentation semantics being proposed in the literature. Though most of them sharethe influential theory of Dung [14] as a common reference framework, comparing and assessing semantics proposalsappears far from being a straightforward task. In fact, various kinds of motivations have been used to support the intro-duction of new semantics with respect to “classical” proposals such as stable [23], grounded [19], complete [14] andpreferred [14] semantics. These motivations range from the desire to formalize some high-level intuition, not capturedby other proposals, to the need to achieve the “correct” treatment of a particular example (or family of examples), re-garded as particularly significant. For instance, CF2 semantics [2,6] has originally been conceived to deal with someproblematic behaviors of preferred semantics when dealing with odd-length cycles. Semi-stable semantics [9] aimsat avoiding the problem of non-existence of extensions affecting stable semantics in some cases, while preserving itsbehavior when stable extensions exist as well as the related property of minimizing undecided arguments. Prudent✩ This article is a substantial extension of the conference paper [P. Baroni, M. Giacomin, Evaluation and comparison criteria for extension-basedargumentation semantics, in: P.E. Dunne, T. Bench-Capon (Eds.), Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Computational Models ofArguments (COMMA 2006), IOS Press, Liverpool, UK, 2006, pp. 157–168].* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: baroni@ing.unibs.it (P. Baroni), giacomin@ing.unibs.it (M. Giacomin).0004-3702/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2007.04.004676P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700semantics [12,13] emphasizes the role of indirect attacks, which are not allowed within its extensions, while idealsemantics [15] provides a unique-status approach which is as computationally efficient as grounded semantics whilebeing less skeptical.Clearly, these kinds of heterogeneous intuitions hardly lend themselves to systematic comparisons. As a further dif-ficulty, general comparison and evaluation criteria are actually lacking, since the problem of identifying and formallycharacterizing such criteria seems to have received relatively limited attention in the literature. Given this situation, itis not surprising that comparisons are quite often carried out using specific problematic examples, often ingeniouslydevised so as to bring to light patently different behaviors exhibited by the semantics under discussion. A samplecollection of this kind of “benchmark problems” can be found for instance in [25]. While carefully selected examplescan surely provide useful insights for the analysis of alternative semantics proposals, example-based comparisonssuffer from several significant drawbacks. First of all, they are affected by the inherent limitation of relying more onintuition than on formally stated principles. In fact, even in relatively simple examples there may not be a generalagreement on the “desired” outcome, due to different underlying intuitions (see for instance [16]). For this reason, ithas been observed that using intuition about specific examples to derive general considerations may be inappropriateand “it is better to use intuitions not as critical tests but as generators for further investigation” [20]. The signifi-cance of benchmark problems as testbeds for evaluation and guidelines for semantics design is also put in question byVreeswijk’s interpolation theorem [25], which proves that “for any compatible collection of instantiated benchmarkproblems there exists an abstract argumentation system that complies with every instantiated benchmark problem”.This suggests that “the enterprise of solving more and more of these problems does not necessarily bring us to theultimate non-monotonic logic” [25] (see also [8, Chapter 2] for a discussion of this point). It has also to be remarkedthat some examples, explicitly conceived for one-to-one comparison of specific semantics, may turn out to be lesssignificant when evaluating a large range of proposals. Moreover, these examples typically are aimed at evidencing(and possibly overemphasizing) differences, while a balanced evaluation should also take into account similarities andcommon features. Emphasis on disagreement gives rise, as a side-effect, to the quest for the “right” semantics, which,in our opinion, is a misleading objective. In fact, different application domains may well require different styles ofreasoning, reflected by different semantics flavors. Characterizing the reasoning requirements of different domains(still a largely open research problem) can only be based on general criteria rather than on specific cases.In this paper we investigate the definition of some general criteria for evaluating extension-based argumentationsemantics in the framework of Dung’s theory. The introduced criteria are then applied to several literature proposals,thus providing a principle-based systematic assessment of state-of-the-art approaches in argumentation semantics.The paper is organized as follows. After recalling the necessary background concepts in Section 2, we define anddiscuss general criteria for evaluating sets of extensions in Section 3 and comparison criteria based on the notionof skepticism in Section 4. The definitions of grounded, complete, preferred, stable, semi-stable, ideal, prudent, andCF2 semantics are reviewed in Section 5: the introduced criteria are then applied to the above mentioned semantics inSection 6. Finally, a discussion of the relationships with related works and some conclusions are provided in Section 7.2. Basic concepts2.1. Abstract argumentation frameworksOur work adopts as a reference Dung’s theory of abstract argumentation frameworks.Definition 1. An argumentation framework is a pair AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), where A is a set and →⊆ (A × A) is a binaryrelation on A, called attack relation.We assume that A represents the set of arguments produced by a reasoner at a given instant of time, therefore inthe following we will assume that A is finite, independently of the fact that the underlying mechanism of argumentgeneration admits the existence of infinite sets of arguments. The treatment of argumentation frameworks where A isinfinite, including the special case of finitary argumentation frameworks [14] where the number of attackers of eachargument is finite, is left for future work.P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700677An argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) can be represented as a directed graph, called the defeat graph, wherenodes are the arguments and edges correspond to the elements of the attack relation. The nodes that attack a givenargument α are called defeaters (or parents) of α and form a set which is denoted as parAF(α).Definition 2. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and an argument α ∈ A, parAF(α) (cid:2) {β ∈ A | β → α}.If parAF(α) = ∅, then α is called an initial argument. The set of initial arguments of AF is denoted as IN(AF).Since we will frequently consider properties of sets of arguments, it is useful to define suitable notations for them.Definition 3. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), an argument α ∈ A and two (not necessarily disjoint)sets S, P ⊆ A, we define:S → α ≡ ∃β ∈ S: β → αα → S ≡ ∃β ∈ S: α → βS → P ≡ ∃α ∈ S, β ∈ P : α → βoutparAF(S) = {α ∈ A | α /∈ S ∧ α → S}outchildAF(S) = {α ∈ A | α /∈ S ∧ S → α}We also define the restriction of an argumentation framework to a subset S of its arguments.Definition 4. Let AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) be an argumentation framework. The restriction of AF to S ⊆ A is the argumentationframework AF↓S = (cid:3)S, → ∩(S × S)(cid:5).2.2. Extension-based argumentation semanticsGiven an argumentation framework encoding the conflicts among a set of arguments, a fundamental problemconsists in determining the conflict outcome, namely which arguments can be considered justified. An argumentationsemantics can be conceived, in broad terms, as a formal way to answer this question. In argumentation literature, twomain styles of semantics definition can be identified: extension-based and labeling-based.An extension-based argumentation semantics is defined by specifying the criteria for deriving, for a generic ar-gumentation framework, a set of extensions, where each extension represents a set of arguments considered to beacceptable together. Given a generic argumentation semantics S, the set of extensions prescribed by S for a givenargumentation framework AF is denoted as ES (AF). If a semantics S prescribes ES (AF) to be a singleton for anyargumentation framework AF, S is said to belong to the unique-status approach, otherwise to the multiple-statusapproach [22].A labeling-based argumentation semantics relies on a predefined set of labels and is defined by specifying thecriteria for assigning them to the arguments of a generic argumentation framework. Depending on the criteria, oneor (typically) more possible labellings are obtained. Most argumentation semantics proposed in the literature areextension-based (e.g. grounded, complete, stable, preferred, semi-stable, ideal, prudent, and CF2 semantics) whileexamples of labeling-based proposals are represented by robust semantics [17] and by argumentation stages [24]. Ithas also to be remarked that in some cases a labeling definition has an equivalent counterpart in terms of extensions(see for instance [10]). For these reasons, we focus on extension-based semantics and leave the consideration oflabeling-based approaches for future work.The extensions prescribed by a semantics are the basis for deriving the justification state of each argument. Thougha more articulated treatment is possible [5], in this paper we consider a basic classification encompassing just twopossible states for an argument, namely justified or not justified. Two alternative types of justification, namely skepticaland credulous can be considered.Definition 5. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and a semantics S, an argument α is skepticallyjustified iff ∀E ∈ ES (AF) α ∈ E, and is credulously justified iff ∃E ∈ ES (AF): α ∈ E.678P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700A relevant question concerns the existence of extensions. While the definition of most semantics ensures that thereis at least one extension for any argumentation framework, it is well known that this is not always the case. In particular,there are defeat graphs including odd-length cycles where stable semantics fails to provide any extension. To settlethis difficulty once and for all, we take as a standpoint that argumentation frameworks for which no extension existsare simply outside the applicability domain of the considered semantics and therefore they neither play any role inthe properties of the semantics nor can the semantics be used in any way to assess the justification of their arguments.Formally, for a generic semantics S let DS be the set of argumentation frameworks where S admits at least oneextension, namely DS = {AF: ES (AF) (cid:15)= ∅}: in the following, whenever we will refer to the properties of a semanticsS for an argumentation framework AF we will implicitly assume that AF ∈ DS if not differently specified. Note thatthe case of non-existence of extensions, namely ES (AF) = ∅, is significantly different from the case ES (AF) = {∅},where the semantics prescribes exactly one (actually empty) extension. Note in particular that, in the latter case,AF ∈ DS .Let us now introduce two fundamental principles underlying the definition of extension-based semantics in Dung’sframework, namely the language independence principle and the conflict free principle.The language independence principle intuitively consists in the fact that the extensions prescribed by a semanticsonly depend on the relations of attack between arguments considered as abstract entities, namely on the topologyof the corresponding defeat graph, while extensions are totally independent of any property of arguments at theunderlying level of the language where their internal structure and features can be explicitly represented. Formally,this principle corresponds to the fact that argumentation frameworks which are isomorphic have the “same” (modulothe isomorphism) extensions, as stated by the following definitions.Definition 6. Two argumentation frameworks AF1 = (cid:3)A1, →1(cid:5) and AF2 = (cid:3)A2, →2(cid:5) are isomorphic if and only ifthere is a bijective mapping m : A1 → A2, such that (α, β) ∈ →1 if and only if (m(α), m(β)) ∈ →2. This is denotedas AF1◦=m AF2.Definition 7. A semantics S satisfies the language independence principle if and only if ∀ AF1 = (cid:3)A1, →1(cid:5), ∀ AF2 =(cid:3)A2, →2(cid:5): AF1◦=m AF2, ES (AF2) = {M(E) | E ∈ ES (AF1)}, where M(E) = {β ∈ A2 | ∃α ∈ E, β = m(α)}.All semantics defined at the abstract level of Dung’s framework, and in particular all semantics we will deal within this paper, adhere to the language independence principle.The conflict free principle, denoted as CF , intuitively relies on the idea that, since an extension is a set of argumentswhich are “acceptable together”, no conflicting arguments can be included in the same extension. The CF principlehas a straightforward formal counterpart.Definition 8. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set S ⊆ A is conflict-free, denoted as cf (S), iff(cid:2)α, β ∈ S such that α → β. A semantics S satisfies the CF principle if and only if ∀ AF, ∀E ∈ ES (AF) E is conflict-free.As to our knowledge, all extension-based argumentation semantics proposed in the literature1 adhere to the CFprinciple, which in the following will be given for granted. Therefore, where no further specifications are given, by aset of extensions of an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) we will mean a set of conflict-free subsets of A.3. Extension evaluation criteriaBy an extension evaluation criterion we mean a property of a set of extensions on its own, not involving a compar-ison with other sets of extensions. We discuss evaluation criteria related to three different aspects: the maximality ofextensions, the notion of defense, and the topology of the defeat graph.1 Note, however, that the definition of the CF principle as given in this paper is not directly applicable to literature approaches featuring a richerstructure of argumentation frameworks and lying therefore outside the strict context of Dung’s theory (e.g. preference-based [1] or value-based [7]argumentation frameworks).P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–7006793.1. The I-maximality criterionGiven that an extension can be intuitively conceived as a set of arguments that can be accepted together accordingto some semantics-specific requirements, one may consider as an additional constraint that no extension can be aproper subset of another one. This has a straightforward formal counterpart.Definition 9. A set of extensions E is I-maximal iff ∀E1, E2 ∈ E, if E1 ⊆ E2 then E1 = E2. A semantics S satisfiesthe I-maximality criterion if and only if ∀ AF ES (AF) is I-maximal.Note that I-maximality is a property of the set of extensions E per se and does not imply that maximality isprescribed by the semantics-specific definition of what an extension is. For instance any unique-status semantics nec-essarily satisfies I-maximality according to Definition 9, independently of the fact that the unique extension prescribedby the semantics is a maximal set in any sense. I-maximality is an important criterion in relation to the notion of skep-tical justification: given two extensions E1 and E2 belonging to a set of extensions E, if E1 (cid:3) E2 then any argumentα ∈ E2 \ E1 cannot be skeptically justified according to Definition 5. As a limit case, if the empty set is included inthe set of extensions then any argument cannot be skeptically justified, independently of other extensions. To avoidthis kind of undesired effect, I-maximality is a crucial criterion and is in fact enforced by most semantics, as it will bediscussed in Section 6. On the other hand, when the set of extensions is not meant to be used for evaluating skepticaljustification, I-maximality is not fundamental any more.3.2. Defense related criteriaAs the arguments belonging to an extension can be regarded as “surviving the conflict together”, the notion ofdefense against attacks coming from other arguments has always played an important role in argumentation semantics.Formally, this has a counterpart in the requirement of admissibility, which lies at the heart of all semantics discussedin [14] and is based on the well-known notions of acceptable argument and admissible set.Definition 10. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), an argument α ∈ A is acceptable with respect to aset E ⊆ A if and only if ∀β ∈ A: β → α, E → β.Definition 11. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set E ⊆ A is admissible if and only ifE is conflict-free and ∀β ∈ A: β → E, E → β. The set made up of all the admissible sets of AF will be denotedas AS(AF).Definition 12. A semantics S satisfies the admissibility criterion if ∀ AF ∈ DS , ∀E ∈ ES (AF) E ∈ AS(AF), namely:α ∈ E ⇒ ∀β ∈ parAF(α) E → β(1)Condition (1) includes the case where α defends itself against (some of) its defeaters. We suggest that a strongernotion of defense may also be considered where a node α can not defend itself nor can be involved in its own defense.To this purpose we introduce the notion of strongly defended argument.Definition 13. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), α ∈ A and S ⊆ A, we say that α is strongly de-fended by S (denoted as sd(α, S)) iff ∀β ∈ parAF(α) ∃γ ∈ S \ {α}: γ → β and sd(γ , S \ {α}).In words, α is strongly defended by S if S includes a defeater γ (cid:15)= α for any defeater β of α; in turn, γ has tobe strongly defended by S \ α, namely γ needs neither α nor itself to be defended against its defeaters in AF. Therecursion is well founded since, at any step, a set of strictly lesser cardinality is considered. In particular, in casesd(α, S) the base of this recursive definition is provided by initial nodes, which are strongly defended by any set sincethey have no defeaters. The notion of strong defense is the basis for the definition of the strong admissibility criterion.Definition 14. A semantics S satisfies the strong admissibility criterion if ∀ AF ∈ DS , ∀E ∈ ES (AF) it holds that:α ∈ E ⇒ sd(α, E)(2)680P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700The property of reinstatement corresponds to the converse of the implication (1) prescribed by the admissibilitycriterion. Intuitively, an argument α is reinstated if its defeaters are in turn defeated and, as a consequence, onemay assume that they should have no effect on the justification state of α. Under this assumption, if an extension Ereinstates α then α should belong to E. Formally, this leads to the following reinstatement criterion.Definition 15. A semantics S satisfies the reinstatement criterion if ∀ AF ∈ DS , ∀E ∈ ES (AF) it holds that:(cid:2)∀β ∈ parAF(α) E → β(cid:3)⇒ α ∈ E(3)Considering the strong notion of defense we obtain a weak (since it is implied by condition (3)) reinstatementcriterion.Definition 16. A semantics S satisfies the weak reinstatement criterion if ∀ AF ∈ DS , ∀E ∈ ES (AF) it holds that:sd(α, E) ⇒ α ∈ E(4)Another observation concerns the fact that condition (3) prescribes that an argument α defended by an extensionshould be included in the extension, without specifying that α should not give rise to conflicts within the extension.To explicitly take into account this aspect, the following CF -reinstatement criterion can be given.Definition 17. A semantics S satisfies the CF -reinstatement criterion if ∀ AF ∈ DS , ∀E ∈ ES (AF) it holds that:(cid:2)(cid:2)∀β ∈ parAF(α) E → β∧ cf(cid:3)(cid:2)E ∪ {α}(cid:3)(cid:3)⇒ α ∈ E(5)3.3. The directionality criterionThe notion of directionality in argumentation semantics has first been considered in [6], where a general schemerelating the topology of the defeat graph with the definition of extensions has been introduced. At an intuitive level,the idea is quite simple: the justification state of an argument α should be affected only by the justification state ofthe defeaters of α (which in turn are affected by their defeaters and so on), while the arguments which only receivean attack from α (and in turn those which are attacked by them and so on) should not have any effect on the stateof α. We provide here an extended notion of directionality with respect to [6] by considering a set of arguments notreceiving attacks from outside.Definition 18. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set U ⊆ A is unattacked if and only if (cid:2)α ∈(A \ U ): α → U . The set of unattacked sets of AF is denoted as US(AF).The directionality criterion can then be defined by requiring an unattacked set to be unaffected by the remainingparts of the argumentation framework as far as extensions are concerned.Definition 19. A semantics S satisfies the directionality criterion if and only if ∀ AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), ∀U ∈ US(AF),AE S (AF, U ) = ES (AF↓U ), where AE S (AF, U ) (cid:2) {(E ∩ U ) | E ∈ ES (AF)} ⊆ 2U .In words, the intersection of any extension prescribed by S for AF with an unattacked set U is equal to one of theextensions prescribed by S for the restriction of AF to U , and vice versa.While the definition of directionality given here refers to a single argumentation framework, it can be easily refor-mulated as a criterion concerning distinct argumentation frameworks which are equal as far as their restriction to anunattacked set is concerned.Proposition 20. A semantics S satisfies the directionality criterion if and only if ∀ AF1 = (cid:3)A1, →1(cid:5), ∀ AF2 =(cid:3)A2, →2(cid:5) such that ∃U ∈ (US(AF1) ∩ US(AF2)): AF1↓U = AF2↓U it holds thatAE S (AF1, U ) = AE S (AF2, U )(6)P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700681Proof. Definition 19 directly implies condition (6) since AE S (AF1, U ) = ES (AF1↓U ) = ES (AF2↓U ) =AE S (AF2, U ). On the other hand, considering any argumentation framework AF and U ∈ US(AF) we can applycondition (6) with AF1 = AF and AF2 = AF↓U , obtaining AE S (AF, U ) = AE S (AF↓U , U ) = ES (AF↓U ), since forany AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) AE S (AF, A) = ES (AF). (cid:2)4. Skepticism related criteriaThe notion of skepticism has often been used in informal or semi-formal ways to discuss semantics behavior, e.g.by observing that a semantics is “more skeptical” than another one. Intuitively, a semantics is more skeptical thananother if it makes less committed choices about the justification state of the arguments. Roughly, the most skepticalconceivable semantics does not make any commitment on any argument, leaving all of them undecided, while asemantics is not skeptical at all if it takes a definite position about every argument in any argumentation framework.While the issue of skepticism has been considered so far in the literature mostly in the case of comparison betweenspecific proposals, we are interested here in a more general analysis. We consider, as a first step, a generic relation ofskepticism (cid:19)E between sets of extensions: given two sets of extensions E1, E2 of an argumentation framework AF,E1 (cid:19)E E2 will simply denote that E1 is at least as skeptical as E2 in some sense. In the context of semantics evaluation,a skepticism relation (cid:19)E can be used to compare the sets of extensions prescribed by a particular semantics on dif-ferent but related argumentation frameworks. To this purpose, one first needs to define a skepticism relation betweenargumentation frameworks based on the same set of arguments: given two argumentation frameworks AF1 = (cid:3)A, →1(cid:5)and AF2 = (cid:3)A, →2(cid:5), AF1 (cid:19)A AF2 denotes that AF1 (actually its attack relation) is inherently less committed (to beprecise, not more committed) than AF2. Then, one may reasonably require that any semantics reflects in its extensionsthe skepticism relations between argumentation frameworks. Requirements of this kind will be called adequacy cri-teria. On the other hand, a skepticism relation between sets of extensions might also be used to compare the behaviorof different semantics when applied to the same argumentation framework. Comparison between semantics accordingto this kind of relations is not considered in this paper and is left for future work.It is worth noting that the skepticism relations introduced above are not necessarily total orders, since in generalthere can be two sets of extensions (or two argumentation frameworks) which are not comparable. Having introducedskepticism relations at an abstract level, let us examine in the following subsections how they can be concretelydefined.4.1. Skepticism relations between sets of extensionsLet us start by noting that defining a relation of skepticism between two extensions is intuitively straightforward:an extension E1 is more skeptical than another extension E2 if and only if E1 ⊆ E2. In fact, a more skeptical attitudecorresponds to a smaller set of arguments surviving the conflict. This is actually the relation that can be applied tocompare the behavior of two distinct unique-status semantics, as it is done for ideal and grounded semantics in [15].Directly extending the above intuition to the comparison of sets of extensions leads to define the following elementaryskepticism relation (cid:19)E∩ .Definition 21. Given two sets of extensions E1 and E2 of an argumentation framework AF, E1 (cid:19)E∩ E2 iff(cid:4)(cid:4)E1 ⊆E2(7)E1∈E1E2∈E2In words, condition (7) corresponds to the fact that arguments skeptically justified according to E1 are also skepti-cally justified according to E2, which appears to be an essential requirement and provides an intuitive bound for anyrelation of skepticism.Relation (cid:19)E∩ is based on considerations referring only to skeptically justified arguments. Finer (and actuallystronger) skepticism relations can be defined by considering relationships of pairwise inclusion between extensions.As a starting point, we recall that to compare a single extension E1 with a set of extensions E2, the relation ∀E2 ∈ E2E1 ⊆ E2 has often been used in the literature (for instance to verify that the unique extension prescribed by groundedsemantics is more skeptical than the set of extensions prescribed by preferred semantics). A direct generalization to682P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700the comparison of two sets of extensions is represented by the following weak skepticism relation (cid:19)Eby the authors in [5].W , first introducedDefinition 22. Given two sets of extensions E1 and E2 of an argumentation framework AF, E1 (cid:19)EWE2 iff∀E2 ∈ E2 ∃E1 ∈ E1: E1 ⊆ E2(8)Relation (cid:19)EW is unidirectional, since it only constrains the extensions of E2, while E1 may contain additionalextensions unrelated to those of E2. One may then consider also a more symmetric (and stronger) relationship (cid:19)ES ,where it is also required that any extension of E1 is included in an extension of E2.Definition 23. Given two sets of extensions E1 and E2 of an argumentation framework AF, E1 (cid:19)ESthe following condition holds:E2 iff E1 (cid:19)EWE2 and∀E1 ∈ E1 ∃E2 ∈ E2: E1 ⊆ E2(9)Having introduced three alternative skepticism relations between sets of extensions, let us now analyze some oftheir properties. First, it is immediate to see that the three relations are in strict order of implication. Given two sets ofextensions E1 and E2 of an argumentation framework AF, it holds that:E1 (cid:19)ESE2 ⇒ E1 (cid:19)EWE2 ⇒ E1 (cid:19)E∩ E2(10)Then, it can be easily seen (proof is omitted,2 see [5] for a related result) that the relations give rise to a preorder.Proposition 24. Relations (cid:19)E∩ , (cid:19)EW and (cid:19)ES are preorders, i.e. they are reflexive and transitive.A simple example reveals that (cid:19)ES is not antisymmetric. In fact, let us consider three extensions E1, E2 and E3E1,such that E1 (cid:3) E2 (cid:3) E3, and let E1 be {E1, E2, E3}, E2 be {E1, E3}. It can be seen that E1 (cid:19)EShowever E1 (cid:15)= E2. Since (cid:19)ES entails the other relations, none of them is antisymmetric and therefore none of the threerelations is a partial order. It is immediate to show (proof is omitted) that if the additional constraint of I-maximalityis introduced, then (cid:19)E∩ isanyway not).S ) turns out to be a partial order (while it is easy to see that (cid:19)EW (and as a consequence (cid:19)EE2 and E2 (cid:19)ESProposition 25. Given two I-maximal sets of extensions E1 and E2, if E1 (cid:19)EWE2 and E2 (cid:19)EWE1 then E1 = E2.4.2. A skepticism relation between argumentation frameworksWhile we are not aware of any definition of a general skepticism relation for argumentation frameworks in theliterature, some more specific but related notions have been introduced by the authors in [3] and by Modgil in [18].The skepticism relation (cid:19)A we propose for argumentation frameworks provides a generalization of these notions,while relying on the same common intuition concerning the relationship between a mutual and a unidirectional attackinvolving two arguments α and β.To illustrate the intuition discussed in [3], let us consider a very simple argumentation framework including justtwo arguments α and β, where α attacks β but not vice versa. This is a situation where the state assignment ofany argumentation semantics corresponds to the maximum level of commitment: it is universally accepted that αshould be justified and β rejected. Now if we consider a modified argumentation framework where an attack fromβ to α has been added, we obtain a situation where, clearly, a lesser level of commitment is appropriate: giventhe mutual attack between the two arguments, neither of them can be assigned a definitely committed state and weare left in a more undecided, i.e. more skeptical, situation in absence of any reason for preferring either of them.Extending this reasoning, consider a couple of arguments α and β in a generic argumentation framework AF(cid:20) suchthat α → β while β (cid:15)→ α. Consider now an argumentation framework AF obtained from AF(cid:20) by simply adding an2 To keep the size of the paper within reasonable limits, several proofs are omitted. They can be found in [4].P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700683attack relation from β to α while leaving all the rest unchanged. It seems reasonable to state that AF corresponds to amore undecided situation with respect to AF(cid:20). In fact, converting a unidirectional attack into a mutual attack can onlymake the justification states of the involved nodes less committed (of course, they can remain the same if they arestrictly determined by other arguments, independently of the attack relations between α and β). In turn, having α orβ in a less committed state may only give rise to other less committed states in the nodes they attack: intuitively, themore undecided is the state of an attacker, the more undecided should be the state of the attacked node, and, in turn,of the nodes attacked by the latter and so on. This reasoning will be generalized here by considering any number of“transformations” of unidirectional attacks into mutual ones.Dealing with the case of hierarchical argumentation frameworks but relying on the same intuition, Modgil hasindependently introduced in [18] the notion of partial resolution of an argumentation framework AF, which, roughlyspeaking, is an argumentation framework AF(cid:20) where some mutual attacks of AF are converted into unidirectionalones. AF(cid:20) is a (complete) resolution of AF if all mutual attacks of AF are converted. Also in [18] the underlying ideais that the presence of mutual attacks corresponds to a more undecided situation.Given these bases, we are now ready to define a skepticism relation (cid:19)A between argumentation frameworks basedon the same set of arguments, which requires a preliminary notation concerning the set of conflicting pairs of argu-ments in an argumentation framework.Definition 26. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), CON F(AF) (cid:2) {(α, β) ∈ A × A | α → β ∨ β → α}.Definition 27. Given two argumentation frameworks AF1 = (cid:3)A, →1(cid:5) and AF2 = (cid:3)A, →2(cid:5), AF1 (cid:19)A AF2 if and onlyif CON F(AF1) = CON F(AF2) and →2 ⊆ →1.It is easy to see that the above definition covers all cases where some (possibly none) mutual attacks of AF1correspond to unidirectional attacks in AF2, while unidirectional attacks of AF1 are the same in AF2 (using theterminology of [18], AF2 is a partial resolution of AF1).It is immediate to see that (cid:19)A is a partial order, as it consists of an equality and a set inclusion relation. Comparableargumentation frameworks feature the same set of arguments and the same set of conflicting pairs of arguments, andcan not include opposite unidirectional attacks between the same pair of arguments. It is also worth noting that withinthe set of argumentation frameworks comparable with a given AF there are, in general, several maximal elements withrespect to (cid:19)A, namely all argumentation frameworks where no mutual attack is present (corresponding to the notionof resolution in [18]). In the following we will denote as RES(AF) the set of argumentation frameworks comparablewith AF and maximal with respect to (cid:19)A.4.3. Skepticism adequacyGiven an argumentation framework which is more skeptical than another one, it is reasonable to require that,when applying the same semantics to both, the skepticism relation between them is preserved between their sets ofextensions. This kind of criterion, called skepticism adequacy, has first been proposed in [3] and is formulated here ina generalized version.Definition 28. Given a skepticism relation (cid:19)E between sets of extensions, a semantics S is (cid:19)E-skepticism-adequate,denoted as SA(cid:19)E (S), if and only if for any pair of argumentation frameworks AF, AF(cid:20) such that AF (cid:19)A AF(cid:20) thefollowing condition holds ES (AF) (cid:19)E ES (AF(cid:20)).According to the definitions provided in Section 4.1 we have three skepticism adequacy properties, related by thesame order of implication as in (10):SA(cid:19)ES(S) ⇒ SA(cid:19)EW(S) ⇒ SA(cid:19)E∩(S)(11)It is easy to see that Definition 28 is equivalent to the one given in [3] where the modification of just one attackrelation is considered, provided that, as in our case, skepticism relations are transitive.684P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700Proposition 29. Given a transitive skepticism relation (cid:19)E between sets of extensions and a semantics S, SA(cid:19)E (S) ifand only if for any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), for any α, β ∈ A: α (cid:15)= β ∧ α → β,ES (AF(cid:2)(α,β)) (cid:19)E ES (AF)where AF(cid:2)(α,β) = (cid:3)A, → ∪{(β, α)}(cid:5).(12)Proof. Clearly (cid:19)E-skepticism adequacy implies (12) as a special case. On the other hand, for any pair of argumenta-tion frameworks AF, AF(cid:20) such that AF (cid:19)A AF(cid:20), it is clearly possible to construct at least one sequence AF1, . . . , AFn(cid:2)(αi ,βi ). Then if (12)such that AF1 = AF, AFn = AF(cid:20), and for i = 1, . . . , n − 1, ∃αi, βi ∈ A such that AFi = AFi+1holds, we have ES (AF) = ES (AF1) (cid:19)E · · · (cid:19)E ES (AFn) = ES (AF(cid:20)), and, by transitivity, ES (AF) (cid:19)E ES (AF(cid:20)). (cid:2)4.4. Resolution adequacyIn the context of hierarchical argumentation frameworks, the following requirement for an argumentation semanticsS is proposed in [18] for any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and for any argument α ∈ A:α ∈E ⇔ ∀ AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF) α ∈(cid:4)(cid:4)E∈ES (AF)EE∈ES (AF(cid:20))(13)It can be seen that the ⇒-part of (13) is a special case of the skepticism adequacy criterion of Definition 28, where,∩ isamong the argumentation frameworks AF(cid:20) such that AF (cid:19)A AF(cid:20), only the maximal ones are considered and (cid:19)Eselected as the skepticism relation (cid:19)E between sets of extensions.On the other hand, the ⇐-part of (13) represents an original criterion, relying on the intuition that if an argumentis skeptically justified in all possible resolutions of an argumentation framework AF then it should be skepticallyjustified in AF too. We refer to this criterion as resolution adequacy and provide now a generalization of its originalformulation, in order to make it parametric with respect to skepticism relations between sets of extensions. In fact,ES (AF(cid:20)), it can be seen that the ⇐-part of (13) is equivalent to UR(AF, S) (cid:19)Eletting UR(AF, S) =∩ES (AF). Generalizing this condition leads to a parametric formulation of the resolution adequacy criterion.AF(cid:20)∈RES(AF)(cid:5)Definition 30. Given a skepticism relation (cid:19)E between sets of extensions, a semantics S is (cid:19)E-resolution adequate,denoted RA(cid:19)E (S), if and only if for any argumentation framework AF it holds that UR(AF, S) (cid:19)E ES (AF).According to the definitions in Section 4.1, we have three resolution adequacy properties, related by the usual orderof implication:RA(cid:19)ES(S) ⇒ RA(cid:19)EW(S) ⇒ RA(cid:19)E∩(S)5. A review of extension-based argumentation semantics(14)To make the paper self-contained, in this section we review the definition of several argumentation semantics whichwill be evaluated against the criteria defined in previous sections.5.1. Traditional semanticsStable semantics, one of the earliest multiple-status approaches and still largely adopted in several applicationdomains, relies on the idea that an extension should not only be internally consistent but also able to reject thearguments that are outside the extension. This reasoning leads to the notion of stable extension [14,23].Definition 31. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set E ⊆ A is a stable extension of AF if and onlyif E is conflict-free and ∀α ∈ A: α /∈ E, E → α.Stable semantics will be denoted as ST , and, accordingly, the set of all the stable extensions of AF will be denotedas EST (AF).P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700685Fig. 1. A three-length cycle.Stable semantics suffers from a significant limitation since there are argumentation frameworks, like the one shownin Fig. 1, where no extension complying with Definition 31 exists. No other semantics considered in this paper isaffected by this problem except the prudent version of stable semantics.The requirement that an extension should attack all other external arguments can be relaxed by imposing that anextension is simply able to defend itself from external attacks. This is at the basis of the notions of acceptable argumentand admissible set [14], already recalled in Section 3.2. The set of the arguments acceptable with respect to a set E istraditionally denoted using the characteristic function FAF(E).Definition 32. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), the function FAF : 2A → 2A which, given a setE ⊆ A, returns the set of the acceptable arguments with respect to E, is called the characteristic function of AF.Building on these concepts, the notion of complete extension can be introduced, which plays a key role in Dung’stheory, since all semantics encompassed by his framework select their extensions among the complete ones.Definition 33. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set E ⊆ A is a complete extension if and only if Eis admissible and every argument of A which is acceptable with respect to E belongs to E, i.e. E ∈ AS(AF) ∧ ∀α ∈FAF(E) α ∈ E.The notion of complete extension does not entail the property of I-maximality. In fact, Definition 33 only establishesthat nodes already defended by an extension E are included in E, but does not impose that nodes (or sets of nodes)that defend themselves are added to the extension. Probably for this reason, the notion of complete extension is notassociated to a notion of complete semantics in [14], but rather represents an intermediate step towards the definitionof grounded and preferred semantics. However, the term complete semantics has subsequently gained acceptance inthe literature (see for instance [9,18]) and will be used in the present analysis to refer to the properties of the set ofcomplete extensions. Complete semantics will be denoted as CO.The well-known grounded semantics, denoted as GR, belongs to the unique-status approach and its unique exten-sion, denoted as GE(AF), can be defined as the least fixed point of the characteristic function.Definition 34. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), the grounded extension of AF, denoted as GE(AF),is the least (with respect to set inclusion) fixed point of FAF.Preferred semantics, denoted as PR, is obtained by simply requiring the property of maximality along with ad-missibility.Definition 35. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set E ⊆ A is a preferred extension of AF if andonly if it is a maximal (with respect to set inclusion) admissible set, i.e. a maximal element of AS(AF).5.2. SCC-recursiveness and CF2 semanticsIn [6] a general schema for argumentation semantics, called SCC-recursiveness, has been introduced. SCC-recursiveness is a property of the extensions which relies on the graph theoretical notion of strongly connectedcomponents (SCCs).686P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700Definition 36. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), the binary relation of path-equivalence betweennodes, denoted as PEAF ⊆ (A × A), is defined as follows:• ∀α ∈ A, (α, α) ∈ PEAF;• given two distinct nodes α, β ∈ A, (α, β) ∈ PEAF if and only if there is a (directed) path from α to β and a(directed) path from β to α.The strongly connected components of AF are the equivalence classes of nodes under the relation of path-equivalence.The set of the SCCs of AF is denoted as SCCSAF.A particular case is represented by the empty argumentation framework: when AF = (cid:3)∅, ∅(cid:5) we assumeSCCSAF = {∅}.We extend to SCCs the notion of parents, namely the set of the other SCCs that attack a SCC S, which is denotedas sccparAF(S), and we introduce the definition of proper ancestors, denoted as sccancAF(S).Definition 37. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and a SCC S ∈ SCCSAF, we define sccparAF(S) ={P ∈ SCCSAF | P (cid:15)= S and P → S} and sccancAF(S) = sccparAF(S) ∪ (P ∈sccparAF(S) sccancAF(P )). A SCC S suchthat sccparAF(S) = ∅ is called initial.(cid:5)It is well-known that the graph obtained by considering SCCs as single nodes is acyclic. In other words, SCCscan be partially ordered according to the relation of attack and initial SCCs are those which are not preceded by anyother one in this partial order. Of course, in any argumentation framework there is at least one initial SCC. This factlies at the heart of the definition of SCC-recursiveness, which is based on the intuition that extensions can be builtincrementally starting from initial SCCs and following the above mentioned partial order. In other words, the choicesconcerning extension construction carried out in an initial SCC do not depend on those concerning the other ones,while they directly affect the choices about the subsequent SCCs and so on. While the basic underlying intuitionis rather simple, the formalization of SCC-recursiveness is admittedly rather complex and involves some additionalnotions. To keep the size of the paper within reasonable limits, we can only quickly recall the relevant definitions here,while referring the reader to [6] for more details and examples.First of all, the choices (represented in the following definition by the set E) within the proper ancestor SCCsdetermine a partition of the nodes of a generic SCC S into three subsets.Definition 38. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set E ⊆ A and a strongly connected componentS ∈ SCCSAF, we define:• DAF(S, E) = {α ∈ S | (E ∩ outparAF(S)) → α};• PAF(S, E) = {α ∈ S | (E ∩ outparAF(S)) (cid:15)→ α ∧ ∃β ∈ (outparAF(S) ∩ parAF(α)): E (cid:15)→ β};• UAF(S, E) = S \ (DAF(S, E) ∪ PAF(S, E)) = {α ∈ S | (E ∩ outparAF(S)) (cid:15)→ α ∧ ∀β ∈ (outparAF(S) ∩parAF(α)) E → β}.Regarding E as a part of an extension which is being constructed, the idea is that arguments in DAF(S, E), beingattacked by nodes in E, cannot be chosen in the construction of the extension E (i.e. do not belong to E ∩ S). Selectionof arguments to be included in E is therefore restricted to (S \DAF(S, E)) = (UAF(S, E)∪PAF(S, E)), which, for easeof notation, will be denoted in the following as UPAF(S, E). Then, inspired by the reinstatement principle, we requirethe selection of nodes within a SCC S to be carried out on the restricted argumentation framework AF↓UPAF(S,E)without taking into account the attacks coming from DAF(S, E). Combining these ideas and skipping some detailsnot strictly necessary in the context of the present paper, we can finally recall the definition of SCC-recursiveness.Definition 39. A given argumentation semantics S is SCC-recursive if and only if for any argumentation frameworkAF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) ES (AF) = GF(AF, A), where for any AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and for any set C ⊆ A, the function GF(AF,C) ⊆ 2A is defined as follows: for any E ⊆ A, E ∈ GF(AF, C) if and only ifP. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700687• in case | SCCSAF | = 1, E ∈ BF S (AF, C),• otherwise, ∀S ∈ SCCSAF (E ∩ S) ∈ GF(AF↓UPAF(S,E), UAF(S, E) ∩ C),where BF S (AF, C) is a function, called base function, that, given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) suchthat | SCCSAF | = 1 and a set C ⊆ A, gives a subset of 2A.All SCC-recursive semantics “share” this general scheme and only differ by the specific base function adopted.It has been shown in [6] that all semantics encompassed by Dung’s framework are SCC-recursive and the relevantbase functions have been identified. Moreover, defining and experimenting new SCC-recursive semantics is quite easysince it simply amounts to defining a base function operating on single-SCC argumentation frameworks. As shown in[6], the base function has only to respect two very simple conditions in order to ensure that the resulting extensionssatisfy the requirements of being conflict-free and of being a superset of the grounded extension.Four original SCC-recursive semantics have been defined in [6]. In particular, the SCC-recursive semantics calledCF2 [2,6] can be regarded as the most promising, since it has been shown to provide an interesting behavior in severalcritical examples. Its definition relies on a very simple base function: BF CF2(AF, C) = MCF AF, where MCF AFdenotes the set made up of all the maximal conflict-free sets of AF (note that the parameter C plays no role at all inthis case). We recall here an important result to be used in the following.Lemma 40. (See Lemma 2 of [3].) For any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) ECF2(AF) ⊆ MCF AF.In words, for a generic argumentation framework AF any extension prescribed by CF2 semantics is a maximalconflict-free set of AF (but not vice versa).5.3. Semi-stable semanticsSemi-stable semantics [9], denoted in the following as SST , aims at guaranteeing the existence of extensions in anycase (differently from stable semantics) while coinciding with stable semantics (differently from preferred semantics)when stable extensions exist. The definition of extensions satisfying these desiderata is ingeniously simple.Definition 41. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) a set E ⊆ A is a semi-stable extension if and only ifE is a complete extension such that E ∪ outchildAF(E) is maximal with respect to set inclusion.5.4. Ideal semanticsIdeal semantics [15] provides an alternative unique-status approach which is less skeptical than grounded seman-tics, i.e. for any argumentation framework the (unique) ideal extension is a (sometimes strict) superset of the groundedextension. Also in this case the definition is quite simple.Definition 42. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) a set E ⊆ A is ideal if and only if E is admissibleand ∀P ∈ EPR(AF) E ⊆ P . The ideal extension is the maximal (with respect to set inclusion) ideal set.We will use the symbol ID to refer to the ideal semantics, and the ideal extension of an argumentation frameworkAF will be denoted as ID(AF).5.5. Prudent semanticsPrudent semantics [12,13] emphasizes the role of indirect attacks.Definition 43. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), an argument α indirectly attacks another argumentβ, denoted as α (cid:5)→ β, if there is an odd-length path from α to β in the defeat graph corresponding to AF. A set S iswithout indirect conflicts, denoted as icf (S), if and only if (cid:2)α, β ∈ S: α (cid:5)→ β.688P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700Forbidding indirect attacks leads to the definition of p(rudent)-admissible sets.Definition 44. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set of arguments S ⊆ A is p(rudent)-admissible ifand only if ∀α ∈ S α is acceptable with respect to S and icf (S).On this basis, the prudent version of several traditional notions of extensions (and of the relevant semantics) hasbeen defined.Definition 45. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), a set of arguments S ⊆ A is:• a preferred p-extension if and only if S is a maximal (with respect to set inclusion) p-admissible set;• a stable p-extension if and only if icf (S) and ∀α ∈ (A \ S) S → α;• a complete p-extension if and only if S is p-admissible and there is no argument α /∈ S such that α is acceptablewith respect to S and icf (S ∪ {α}).As to the prudent version of grounded semantics, first the notion of p(rudent)-characteristic function is needed.Definition 46. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), FpAF, is defined as follows: given a set S ⊆ A, FpAF : 2A → 2A, called p-characteristic function ofAF(S) = {α ∈ A | α is acceptable with respect to S and icf (S ∪ {α})}.In general FpAF(∅), i ∈ N, is monotonic, where Fp,1Fp,ilowing definition is given in [12].AF is not monotonic with respect to set inclusion, one can rely however on the fact that the sequence(S)), i > 1. Accordingly, the fol-AF(S), and Fp,iAF(S) = FpAF (S) = FpAF(Fp,i−1AFDefinition 47. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), let j be the lowest integer such that the sequenceAF(∅) is stationary for i (cid:3) j . Then Fp,jFp,iAF (∅) is the grounded p-extension of AF, denoted as GPE(AF).The prudent versions of grounded, complete, preferred and stable semantics will be denoted as GRP, COP, PRPand ST P, respectively.6. Evaluating semanticsIn this section we discuss the application of the evaluation criteria presented in Section 3 and of the adequacycriteria introduced in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 to the semantics reviewed in Section 5. A synthetic view of the results isgiven in Table 1 (for criteria defined in Section 3) and Table 2 (for adequacy criteria).6.1. I-maximalityAs mentioned in Section 3.1, the I-maximality criterion is necessarily satisfied by any unique-status semantics,therefore in particular by grounded, ideal and grounded prudent semantics. The definition of preferred and preferredTable 1Satisfaction of non-skepticism-related criteria by argumentation semanticsI-maximality (Def. 9)Admissibility (Def. 12)Strong adm. (Def. 14)Reinstatement (Def. 15)Weak reinst. (Def. 16)CF-reinst. (Def. 17)Directionality (Def. 19)GRYesYesYesYesYesYesYesCONoYesNoYesYesYesYesSTYesYesNoYesYesYesNoPRCF2SSTYesYesNoYesYesYesYesYesNoNoNoYesYesYesYesYesNoYesYesYesNoIDYesYesNoYesYesYesYesGRPCOPST PPRPYesYesYesNoNoNoYesNoYesNoNoNoNoNoYesYesNoYesYesYesNoYesYesNoNoNoNoNoP. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700689Table 2Satisfaction of adequacy criteria by argumentation semantics(cid:19)E(cid:19)E(cid:19)E(cid:19)E(cid:19)E∩ -sk. ad. (Defs. 21&28)W -sk. ad. (Defs. 22&28)S -sk. ad. (Defs. 23&28)∩ -res. ad. (Defs. 21&30)W -res. ad. (Defs. 22&30)S -res. ad. (Defs. 23&30)(cid:19)EGRYesYesYesNoNoNoCOYesYesNoNoNoNoSTYesYesNoYesYesYesPRNoNoNoYesYesYesCF2YesYesNoNoNoNoSSTIDGRPCOPST PPRPNoNoNoYesYesNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoYesNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoYesYesNoNoNoNoNoNoNoprudent extensions explicitly requires maximality of sets, which obviously entails I-maximality. This extends to semi-stable semantics too, as it is proved in [9] that every semi-stable extension is also a preferred extension. Any stable (orstable prudent) extension E attacks any argument α /∈ E, therefore any strict superset of E is not conflict-free, againentailing I-maximality. As to CF2 semantics, Lemma 40 directly implies I-maximality. Finally, as already mentionedin Section 5.1, it is easy to see that the set of complete (and analogously complete prudent) extensions does not satisfyI-maximality in general.6.2. Admissibility and reinstatementAny complete extension satisfies, by Definition 33, the properties of admissibility (1) and reinstatement (3) (whichin turn entails weak (4) and CF (5) reinstatement). As a consequence, any semantics whose extensions are completeextensions (grounded, preferred, stable, semi-stable, stable prudent) satisfies these properties as well.The ideal extension satisfies admissibility directly by Definition 42. We prove now that it satisfies reinstatement(and therefore also its weaker versions).Proposition 48. For any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), for any argument α such that ∀β ∈ parAF(α)ID(AF) → β, it holds that α ∈ ID(AF).Proof. Suppose by contradiction that ∃α /∈ ID(AF) such that ∀β ∈ parAF(α), ID(AF) → β. Note that since ID(AF) isadmissible and attacks all the defeaters of α by Dung’s fundamental lemma [14] it must be the case that ID(AF) ∪ {α}is admissible. Then the absurd hypothesis may only hold if α is not included in the intersection of the preferred exten-sions of AF, namely ∃E ∈ EPR(AF): α /∈ E. However, ∀E ∈ EPR(AF) E ∪ {α} is admissible by Dung’s fundamentallemma, since E is admissible and ID(AF) ⊆ E, thus ∀β ∈ parAF(α) E → β. This contradicts the fact that E, being apreferred extension, is a maximal admissible set. (cid:2)While the semantics examined so far satisfy admissibility and all forms of reinstatement at the same time, this isnot the case for the remaining semantics. Let us consider admissibility first. Preferred prudent and complete prudentsemantics satisfy admissibility (which is implied by p-admissibility) by Definition 45. The grounded prudent seman-tics satisfies it too, since it also satisfies strong admissibility, as it will be seen later. On the other hand, CF2 semanticsdoes not satisfy admissibility, as it can be seen by considering the argumentation framework shown in Fig. 1, whichconsists of a single strongly connected component. Then ECF2(AF) = BF CF2(AF, A) = MCF AF = {{α}, {β}, {γ }}:clearly, none of these extensions is an admissible set.Turning to reinstatement, a single example, taken from [13], rules it out (even in weaker forms) for the prudentversions of complete, grounded and preferred semantics. Considering Fig. 2, we have that:• {α, (cid:6)} is a preferred p-extension as it is maximal p-admissible (δ cannot be included as it indirectly conflicts withα);• {α, (cid:6)} is also a complete p-extension for the same reason;• {δ, (cid:6)} is the grounded p-extension, in fact Fpadded as it indirectly conflicts with δ.AF(∅) = {δ, (cid:6)} = Fp,iAF(∅) for any i since, in particular, α cannot be690P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700Fig. 2. Direct and indirect attacks.Then it is evident that an initial argument (in this case δ) is not included in a preferred (and complete) prudentextension: this is incompatible with any form of reinstatement. The grounded prudent extension necessarily includesthe initial nodes, but in this example it excludes the argument α which is strongly defended by the extension itself andis not in (direct) conflict with it. Therefore also in this case no form of reinstatement is satisfied.Turning to CF2 semantics, the already mentioned example of Fig. 1 also shows that reinstatement is violated.Considering for instance the extension {α} we have that all the defeaters of γ (actually β) are attacked by the exten-sion, however γ does not belong to the extension. On the other hand, CF2 semantics satisfies both weaker forms ofreinstatement. As to CF -reinstatement, by Lemma 40 it is easy to see that CF2 semantics satisfies condition (5) sinceany extension satisfies the stronger condition cf (E ∪ {α}) ⇒ α ∈ E. As to weak reinstatement, it is known [6] that∀E ∈ ECF2(AF) GE(AF) ⊆ E: then (4) follows from Proposition 50(b).To conclude this section, let us turn to strong admissibility, i.e. condition (2). It is easy to see that this conditionholds for grounded semantics.Proposition 49. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), ∀α ∈ GE(AF) sd(α, GE(AF)).(cid:5)AF (∅)). We prove the claim by induction on the sets FiAF(∅) =Proof. It is known [14] that, for any finite AF, GE(AF) =FAF(Fi−1AF(∅) =FAF(∅) (actually, the initial arguments of the defeat graph) is strongly defended by any set, thus in particu-AF (∅)) (and therefore ∀α ∈lar by F1Fi−1AF (∅) sd(α, GE(AF))). Then ∀β ∈ (FiAF (∅), and since ∀α ∈AF (∅)) then sd(β, Fi−1AF (∅) sd(α, Fi−1Fi−1AF(∅) = FAF(∅) and Fii(cid:3)1 FiAF(S). First, any argument α belonging to F1AF(∅) and GE(AF). Now, assume inductively that ∀α ∈ Fi−1AF (∅)) β is acceptable with respect to Fi−1AF (∅)) holds, entailing sd(β, FiAF(∅)) and sd(β, GE(AF)). (cid:2)AF (∅) sd(α, Fi−1AF(∅), where F1AF(∅) \ Fi−1It is also interesting to note that this notion, in combination with the dual property of weak reinstatement (4) canbe used for a defense-based characterization of the grounded semantics, which, as to our knowledge, has not beenpreviously provided in the literature. First, Proposition 50 shows that, for a given semantics S, satisfying condition(4) is equivalent to the property of agreement with grounded semantics, i.e. for any argumentation framework AF and∀E ∈ ES (AF) GE(AF) ⊆ E.Proposition 50. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and a set E ⊆ A, E satisfies condition (4) if andonly if GE(AF) ⊆ E.Proof. (a) (4) ⇒ GE(AF) ⊆ E.(cid:5)AF(∅) \ Fi−1i(cid:3)1 FiAF(∅), and ∀i, ∀β ∈ (FiAF (∅)). First, any argument α ∈ F1By the proof of Proposition 49, we have that GE(AF) =AF (∅))AF(∅) is initial, thus it is strongly defended by any set and necessarilyAF (∅))sd(β, Fi−1belongs to E according to condition (4). Now, assume inductively that Fi−1sd(β, Fi−1AF(∅) \ Fi−1AF (∅) ⊆ E, we have that sd(β, E), which by (4) implies β ∈ E. Then the conclusion follows.AF (∅)) and Fi−1(b) GE(AF) ⊆ E ⇒ (4).We prove that assuming ∃α /∈ GE(AF): sd(α, E) yields a contradiction, which entails the desired conclusion sinceGE(AF) ⊆ E. By assumption, ∀β ∈ parAF(α), ∃γ ∈ E \ {α}: γ → β ∧ sd(γ , E \ {α}). Since GE(AF) is a completeextension, it must be the case that one of such γ exists with γ /∈ GE(AF), otherwise α ∈ GE(AF). Thus, in particular∃γ /∈ GE(AF): sd(γ , E \ {α}), where GE(AF) ⊆ (E \ {α}). Now, iterating the same kind of reasoning on γ we are ledto consider an argument γ (cid:20) ∈ E \ {α, γ }: sd(γ (cid:20), E \ {α, γ }) ∧ γ (cid:20) /∈ GE(AF). This in turn leads to consider an argumentγ (cid:20)(cid:20) ∈ E \ {α, γ , γ (cid:20)}: sd(γ (cid:20)(cid:20), E \ {α, γ , γ (cid:20)}) ∧ γ (cid:20)(cid:20) /∈ GE(AF), and so on. In summary we are led to consider an infinitesequence of distinct arguments within E, which is impossible due to the finiteness of A. (cid:2)AF (∅) ⊆ E. Since ∀β ∈ (FiP. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700691Fig. 3. A case where ID(AF) (cid:4) GE(AF).On the other hand, condition (2) implies that an extension E is included in the grounded extension.Proposition 51. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and a set E ⊆ A, if E satisfies condition (2) thenE ⊆ GE(AF).Proof. We prove that assuming ∃α /∈ GE(AF): sd(α, E) yields a contradiction, which by condition (2) entails theconclusion E ⊆ GE(AF). Note first that, by assumption, ∃β ∈ A: β → α, since initial nodes belong to GE(AF).Then, according to (2), for any such β there must be an argument γ ∈ E \ {α}: γ → β ∧ sd(γ , E \ {α}). As in theproof of Proposition 50(b), it must be the case that for at least one of these γ , γ /∈ GE(AF), and we are led to consideran infinite sequence of distinct arguments within E, which is impossible. (cid:2)Propositions above show that the conjunction of weak reinstatement and strong admissibility provides a charac-terization of grounded semantics. In particular, any semantics whose extensions are not included in the groundedextension can not satisfy strong admissibility. For instance, considering the simple example of mutual attack (oftencalled Nixon diamond) corresponding to the argumentation framework AF = (cid:3){α, β}, {(α, β), (β, α)}(cid:5), any multiple-status semantics S such that ES (AF) ⊇ {{α}, {β}} violates condition (2). This immediately rules out complete, stable,preferred, CF2, semi-stable, complete prudent, stable prudent and preferred prudent semantics. Also ideal seman-tics does not satisfy (2) since there are cases where GE(AF) (cid:3) ID(AF). For instance, in the example of Fig. 3EPR(AF) = {{α, δ}, {β, δ}}, then ID(AF) = {δ} which is admissible and included in both preferred extensions. How-ever, GE(AF) = ∅.Finally, it can be shown (proof is omitted) that the grounded prudent extension GPE(AF) satisfies strong admissi-bility.Proposition 52. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), ∀α ∈ GPE(AF) sd(α, GPE(AF)).6.3. DirectionalityTo begin our analysis, we prove that the directionality criterion is satisfied by all SCC-recursive semantics suchthat for any argumentation framework the existence of extensions is guaranteed. This covers the cases of grounded,complete, and preferred semantics, whose SCC-recursiveness has been proved in [6], and of CF2 semantics, which,as recalled in Section 5.2, is directly defined in SCC-recursive terms. Two preliminary lemmata, whose easy proof isomitted, are required.Lemma 53. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and a set U ∈ US(AF), ∀S ∈ SCCSAF: (S ∩ U ) (cid:15)= ∅,S ⊆ U . Then ∃Q ⊆ SCCSAF: U =(cid:5)S∈Q S.Lemma 54. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), ∀U ∈ US(AF) ∀S ∈ SCCSAF, S ⊆ U ⇒(cid:5)(S(cid:20)∈sccancAF(S) S(cid:20)) ⊆ U .Proposition 55. Any SCC-recursive semantics S such that ∀ AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) ∀C ⊆ A BFS (AF, C) (cid:15)= ∅, satisfies thedirectionality criterion.692P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700Fig. 4. Stable semantics does not satisfy directionality.Proof. By Definition 39 it holds that for any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5):(cid:6)ES (AF) =E ⊆ A: ∀S ∈ SCCSAF(E ∩ S) ∈ GF(cid:2)AF↓U PAF(S,E), UAF(S, E)(cid:3)(cid:7)(15)Considering a generic unattacked set U ∈ US(AF), from Lemma 53 we know that ∃Q ⊆ SCCSAF: U =S∈Q Sand from Lemma 54 that ∀S ∈ Q sccancAF(S) ⊆ Q. It follows that SCCSAF↓U= Q. Then ES (AF↓U ) = {E ⊆U : ∀S ∈ Q (E ∩ S) ∈ GF((AF↓U )↓UPAF↓U (S,E),UAF↓U (S, E))}. Now, since ∀S ∈ Q sccancAF(S) ⊆ Q, it is easy to see that ∀E ⊆ U , ∀S ∈ Q, the following equalitieshold since the restriction to U does not introduce any difference with respect to the whole AF as far as the relevantsets are concerned: UPAF↓U (S, E) = UPAF(S, E) and UAF↓U (S, E) = UAF(S, E). ThenU (S,E), UAF↓U (S, E))} = {E ⊆ U : ∀S ∈ Q (E ∩ S) ∈ GF(AF↓UPAF↓(cid:5)ES (AF↓U ) =(cid:6)E ⊆ U : ∀S ∈ Q (E ∩ S) ∈ GF(cid:2)AF ↓U PAF(S,E), UAF(S, E)(cid:3)(cid:7)(16)According to Definition 19, we have now to show that AE S (AF, U ) = ES (AF↓U ), where AE S (AF, U ) = {E ∩U : E ∈ ES (AF)}. If E ∈ ES (AF) then from (15) and taking into account that ∀S ∈ Q UPAF(S, E) and UAF(S, E) onlydepend on E ∩U rather than E, it is easy to derive that ∀S ∈ Q ((E ∩U )∩S) ∈ GF(AF↓UPAF(S,E∩U ), UAF(S, E ∩U )),which, using (16), yields (E ∩ U ) ∈ ES (AF↓U ). On the other hand, if E(cid:20) ∈ ES (AF↓U ) then by (16) it satisfiescondition (15) as far as any strongly connected component S ∈ Q is concerned. Then we have to show that ∃E∗such that (E∗ ∩ U ) = E(cid:20) with E∗ satisfying the definition of SCC-recursiveness also for any S(cid:20) ∈ (SCCSAF \Q). Butsince ∀ AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) ∀C ⊆ A, BF S (AF, C) is defined, it is clearly possible to construct such a set E∗ (in general,more than one exist) by applying Definition 39 to the strongly connected components not included in Q following the(partial) order induced among them by the attack relation (note that by Lemma 54 no strongly connected componentin (SCCSAF \Q) can precede any strongly connected component in Q in this order). (cid:2)Stable semantics, while being SCC-recursive [6], does not satisfy the hypothesis of Proposition 55. In fact, it doesnot satisfy the directionality criterion as it can be seen considering Fig. 4, where EST (AF) = {{β}} and thereforeAE ST (AF, {α, β}) = {{β}}, while EST (AF↓{α,β}) = {{α}, {β}}. Since in this example both semi-stable and stableprudent semantics behave as stable semantics, neither of them satisfies directionality.Recalling the argumentation framework of Fig. 2 and the fact that {α, (cid:6)} is both a preferred p- and complete p-extension where the initial argument δ is not included, we immediately see that directionality is satisfied neither bypreferred prudent nor by complete prudent semantics. As to grounded prudent semantics, it is easy to see that itsatisfies directionality as, according to Definition 47, the grounded p-extension can be conceived as the result of aconstructive process starting from initial arguments, where inclusion of an argument only depends on its ancestors.Finally, Proposition 58, which requires two preliminary lemmata whose proof is omitted, shows that the idealsemantics satisfies the directionality criterion.Lemma 56. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), ∀U ∈ US(AF) it holds that• for any E ⊆ A such that E ∈ AS(AF), E ∩ U ∈ AS(AF↓U );• for any E ⊆ U such that E ∈ AS(AF↓U ), E ∈ AS(AF).Lemma 57. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), ID(AF) =(cid:5)E∈AS(AF): ∀P ∈EPR(AF)E⊆P E.Proposition 58. Ideal semantics satisfies the directionality criterion.P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700693Proof. We have to prove that for any argumentation framework AF and for any U ∈ US(AF), ID(AF) ∩ U =ID(AF↓U ). On the basis of Lemma 57, we have to show that(cid:8)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:9)which is equivalent to(cid:10)E∩ U =(cid:9)(cid:10)E ∩ U=(cid:9)EEE∈AS(AF): ∀P ∈EPR(AF) E⊆PE∈AS(AF↓U ): ∀P ∈EPR(AF↓U ) E⊆PE∈AS(AF): ∀P ∈EPR(AF) E⊆PE∈AS(AF↓U ): ∀P ∈EPR(AF↓U ) E⊆PFirst, let us show that the set on the left-hand side of the last equality is a subset of the set on the right-hand side.By Lemma 56, if E ∈ AS(AF) then (E ∩ U ) ∈ AS(AF↓U ). Moreover, ∀P ∈ EPR(AF) (E ∩ U ) ⊆ (P ∩ U ). Sincepreferred semantics satisfies directionality we have that {P ∩ U | P ∈ EPR(AF)} = EPR(AF↓U ), from which itfollows that ∀P ∈ EPR(AF↓U ) (E ∩ U ) ⊆ P . To see that, vice versa, the set on the right-hand side of the equalityis a subset of the set on the left-hand side, recall that by Lemma 56 if E ∈ AS(AF↓U ) then E is also admissible inAF. Exploiting again the directionality of preferred semantics it is finally easy to see that ∀P ∈ EPR(AF↓U ) E ⊆ Pimplies also that ∀P ∈ EPR(AF) E ⊆ P . (cid:2)6.4. Skepticism adequacyIn Section 4.3 three skepticism adequacy properties, ordered by implication, have been defined. First let us showthat grounded semantics satisfies all of them (note that we refer to the equivalent condition stated in Proposition 29,as we will do also in some of the following proofs).Lemma 59. Let us consider an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) with two arguments α, β ∈ A such that α →β. For any two sets of arguments A∗ and A such that A∗ ⊆ A and A is admissible in AF, FAF(cid:2)(α,β)(A∗) ⊆ FAF(A).Proof. Considering a generic γ ∈ FAF(cid:2)(α,β)(A∗), we have to prove that γ ∈ FAF(A), i.e. that γ is acceptable withrespect to A in AF. To this purpose, let us consider a generic argument δ ∈ parAF(γ ), and let us prove that A → δ inAF. By definition of AF(cid:2)(α,β), it is easy to see that δ ∈ parAF(cid:2)(α,β)(γ ), and since γ ∈ FAF(cid:2)(α,β)(A∗) it must be thecase that A∗ → δ holds in AF(cid:2)(α,β). Since A∗ ⊆ A, A → δ in AF(cid:2)(α,β), i.e. ∃(cid:6) ∈ A: (cid:6) → δ in AF(cid:2)(α,β). Now, wehave two cases to consider. If it is not the case that β = (cid:6) and α = δ then, by definition of AF(cid:2)(α,β), (cid:6) → δ also in AFand the claim is proved. Otherwise, β = (cid:6) and α = δ, then, by the hypothesis that α → β in AF it follows that δ → Ain AF, which, by admissibility of A, entails that, also in this case, A → δ in AF. (cid:2)Proposition 60. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and two arguments α, β ∈ A such that α → β, wehave that GE(AF(cid:2)(α,β)) ⊆ GE(AF).AF(cid:2)(α,β)(∅) ⊆Proof. Taking into account the definition of grounded extension, it is sufficient to prove that ∀i (cid:3) 1 FiAF(∅). This can be easily proved by induction on i, taking into account Lemma 59 and the fact that ∀i (cid:3) 1 FiAF(∅) isFiadmissible [14]. In particular, in the basis case Lemma 59 can be applied with A∗ = A = ∅ to prove that FAF(cid:2)(α,β)(∅) ⊆FAF(∅), while in the induction step it can be applied with A∗ = FiAF(∅), where A∗ ⊆ A isinductively assumed, to prove that Fi+1AF(cid:2)(α,β) (∅) and A = FiAF(cid:2)(α,β) (∅) ⊆ Fi+1AF (∅). (cid:2)Since grounded semantics belongs to the unique-status approach, it is immediate to see that the result of Propo-sition 60 entails the satisfaction of all skepticism adequacy properties including its strongest form, based on (cid:19)ES .On the other hand, it is easy to see that (cid:19)ES -skepticism adequacy is in contrast with the behavior of most se-mantics in the simple case of mutually attacking arguments. In fact, letting AF1 = (cid:3){α, β}, {(α, β)}(cid:5) and AF2 =(cid:2)(α,β) = (cid:3){α, β}, {(α, β), (β, α)}(cid:5), any multiple-status semantics S such that (as usual) ES (AF1) = {{α}} andAF1ES (AF2) ⊇ {{α}, {β}} does not satisfy (cid:19)ES -skepticism adequacy. This rules out all the remaining semantics exceptideal and grounded prudent semantics, which however will be shown to fail to satisfy any form of skepticism ade-quacy.694P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700Fig. 5. Several semantics are not skepticism adequate.(cid:19)EW -skepticism adequacy (along with the implied weaker form (cid:19)E∩ ) turns out to be a more reasonable requirement,which we now show to be satisfied by complete, stable and CF2 semantics. Proposition 61 provides the result forcomplete semantics.Proposition 61. Given two argumentation frameworks AF1 = (cid:3)A, →1(cid:5) and AF2 = (cid:3)A, →2(cid:5) such that AF1 (cid:19)A AF2,ECO(AF1) (cid:19)EWECO(AF2).Proof. We have to show that ∀E2 ∈ ECO(AF2) ∃E1 ∈ ECO(AF1): E1 ⊆ E2. The conclusion easily follows fromthe fact that, as well known, for any AF GE(AF) ∈ ECO(AF) and ∀E ∈ ECO(AF) GE(AF) ⊆ E. Moreover, fromProposition 60, we have that GE(AF1) ⊆ GE(AF2). Then ∀E2 ∈ ECO(AF2) ∃E1 = GE(AF1) ∈ ECO(AF1): E1 ⊆GE(AF2) ⊆ E2. (cid:2)Turning to stable semantics, it is easy to see that it satisfies (cid:19)EW -skepticism adequacy in all cases where stableextensions exist for both the argumentation frameworks considered in the comparison (otherwise, one (or both) of theterms of comparison is undefined and nothing can be said).Proposition 62. Given two argumentation frameworks AF1 = (cid:3)A, →1(cid:5) ∈ DST and AF2 = (cid:3)A, →2(cid:5) ∈ DST such thatAF1 (cid:19)A AF2, EST (AF1) (cid:19)EWEST (AF2).Proof. We have to show that ∀E2 ∈ EST (AF2) ∃E1 ∈ EST (AF1): E1 ⊆ E2. It is easy to prove in particular that∀E2 ∈ EST (AF2) E2 ∈ EST (AF1). In fact, since CON F(AF1) = CON F (AF2) if E2 is conflict-free in AF2 it is alsoso in AF1. Moreover, since →2 ⊆ →1, given that ∀α ∈ (A \ E2) E2 →2 α, then ∀α ∈ (A \ E2) E2 →1 α. ThereforeE2 is a stable extension of AF1. (cid:2)Finally, also CF2 semantics satisfies (cid:19)EW -skepticism adequacy. This follows from the (actually stronger) result inProposition 63, proved in [3].Proposition 63. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and two arguments α, β ∈ A such that α (cid:15)= β ∧α → β, ECF2(AF) ⊆ ECF2(AF(cid:2)(α,β)).The remaining semantics fail to satisfy (cid:19)E∩ -skepticism adequacy and therefore skepticism adequacy in any form.Consider first the example in Fig. 5. It can be seen that ES (AF1) = {∅} for preferred, ideal, semi-stable and preferredprudent semantics. However, for the same semantics it holds that ES (AF2) = {(cid:6)}. Also stable prudent semantics failsto satisfy (cid:19)E∩ -skepticism adequacy, as shown by the example in Fig. 6. In fact AF1 admits exactly one stable prudentextension, namely {α, δ}, while AF2 admits as unique stable prudent extension the set {α, γ }. As to grounded prudentsemantics, consider Fig. 7. It is easy to see that GPE(AF1) = {α, γ } (in particular ζ cannot be included as it indirectly(cid:2)(α,β), we have GPE(AF2) = {γ , ζ }. As for completeconflicts with α). On the other hand, considering AF2 = AF1prudent semantics, consider Fig. 8: it turns out that ECOP (AF1) = {{α, γ2}, {γ2, γ5}}, while ECOP (AF2) = {{α}}.P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700695Fig. 6. Stable prudent semantics is not skepticism adequate.Fig. 7. Grounded prudent semantics is not skepticism adequate.Fig. 8. Complete prudent semantics is not skepticism adequate.6.5. Resolution adequacyThe criterion of resolution adequacy is satisfied in all forms by preferred3 and stable semantics. The proof con-cerning preferred semantics requires a preliminary lemma.Lemma 64. (See Lemma 1 of [18].) Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) and a set E ⊆ A, E ∈ AS(AF)if and only if ∃ AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF): E ∈ AS(AF(cid:20)).Proposition 65. For any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), UR(AF, PR) (cid:19)ESEPR(AF).Proof. We have to prove the conditions: (i) ∀E2 ∈ EPR(AF) ∃E1 ∈ UR(AF, PR): E1 ⊆ E2; (ii) ∀E1 ∈UR(AF, PR) ∃E2 ∈ EPR(AF): E1 ⊆ E2.From Lemma 64 it follows in particular that for any maximal admissible set E2 (actually, a preferred extension) ofAF, there is AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF) such that E2 is admissible in AF(cid:20). Then E2 is maximal admissible in AF(cid:20) (since therecannot be an admissible set of AF(cid:20) which is not an admissible set of AF), and therefore E2 ∈ UR(AF, PR). Thus,∀E2 ∈ EPR(AF) E2 ∈ UR(AF, PR), which proves condition (i). On the other hand, since any E1 ∈ UR(AF, PR)3 Some results related to resolution adequacy of grounded, complete, and preferred semantics are provided in [18] and are generalized here.696P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700Fig. 9. Semi-stable semantics is not (cid:19)ES -resolution adequate.is a (maximal) admissible set in an AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF) we know from Lemma 64 that E1 is admissible in AF and istherefore included in one of the maximal admissible sets of AF, which is exactly the desired condition (ii). (cid:2)A similar result holds for stable extensions, provided that their existence in AF and in all elements of RES(AF) isassumed.Proposition 66. For any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), such that AF ∈ DST and ∀ AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF) AF(cid:20) ∈DST , UR(AF, ST ) (cid:19)ESEST (AF).Proof. We actually prove the stronger result UR(AF, ST ) = EST (AF). UR(AF, ST ) ⊆ EST (AF) follows from thefact that any stable extension of any AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF) is also a stable extension of AF (see the proof of Proposition 62).On the other hand, given S ∈ EST (AF), we have to show that there is at least an AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF) such that S ∈EST (AF(cid:20)). If no element of S is involved in a mutual attack, it is easy to see that ∀ AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF) S ∈ EST (AF(cid:20)).Otherwise, such an AF(cid:20) is obtained from AF by suppressing, for any mutual attack involving an argument α ∈ S, theedge incoming into α (clearly there are no mutual attacks within S as it is conflict-free). (cid:2)Semantics which are partially inspired by the notion of stable extension, namely semi-stable and stable prudentsemantics, are unable to satisfy (cid:19)ES -resolution adequacy while complying with its weaker forms. As to negativeresults, Fig. 9 shows that (cid:19)ES -resolution adequacy does not hold for semi-stable semantics. In fact, E1 = {α} is theonly semi-stable extension of AF1 ∈ RES(AF) but there is no E2 among the semi-stable extensions of AF such thatE1 ⊆ E2, since the only semi-stable extension of AF is {β, δ}. As to stable prudent semantics, we can refer back toFig. 6. In fact, E1 = {α, δ} is a stable prudent extension of AF1 ∈ RES(AF2) but there is no E2 among the stableprudent extensions of AF2 such that E1 ⊆ E2 (since the only stable prudent extension of AF2 is {α, γ }).The following proposition shows that semi-stable semantics satisfies (cid:19)EW -resolution adequacy.Proposition 67. For any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), UR(AF, SST ) (cid:19)EWESST (AF).Proof. We have to prove that ∀E2 ∈ ESST (AF) ∃E1 ∈ UR(AF, SST ): E1 ⊆ E2. It is known that any semi-stableextension of any AF is also a preferred extension of AF [9]. Then, given a semi-stable extension E2 ∈ ESST (AF), itcan be derived from the proof of Lemma 64 given in [18] that ∃ AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF) such that E2 is a preferred extensionof AF(cid:20) and outchildAF(E2) = outchildAF(cid:20)(E2). Suppose by contradiction that E2 is not also a semi-stable extensionof AF(cid:20), then there is a maximal admissible set S in AF(cid:20) such that (S ∪ outchildAF(cid:20)(S)) (cid:4) (E2 ∪ outchildAF(cid:20)(E2)).Recall that outchildAF(cid:20)(S) ⊆ outchildAF(S), and that S is admissible also in AF. Then there is a maximal admissi-ble set S∗ ∈ AF such that S∗ ⊇ S and therefore outchildAF(S∗) ⊇ outchildAF(S) ⊇ outchildAF(cid:20)(S). But then (S∗ ∪outchildAF(S∗)) ⊇ (S ∪ outchildAF(S)) ⊇ (S ∪ outchildAF(cid:20)(S)) (cid:4) (E2 ∪ outchildAF(cid:20)(E2)) = (E2 ∪ outchildAF(E2)),thus (S∗ ∪ outchildAF(S∗)) (cid:4) (E2 ∪ outchildAF(E2)) which contradicts the fact that E2 is a semi-stable extension ofAF. (cid:2)Finally, also stable prudent semantics satisfies (cid:19)EW -resolution adequacy (proof is omitted).P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700697Proposition 68. For any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), such that AF ∈ DST P and ∀ AF(cid:20) ∈ RES(AF)AF(cid:20) ∈ DST P , UR(AF, ST P) (cid:19)EWEST P (AF).Turning to grounded prudent semantics, the example of Fig. 10 shows that it does not satisfy (cid:19)Eequacy (and therefore neither its stronger form (cid:19)E{β}, and GPE(AF2) = {α}, from which it is easy to see that (cid:19)Ehand grounded prudent semantics satisfies the weakest form of resolution adequacy (proof is omitted).W -resolution ad-S ). In fact, RES(AF) = {AF1, AF2}, GPE(AF) = ∅, GPE(AF1) =W -resolution adequacy is not satisfied. On the otherFig. 10. Several semantics are not resolution adequate.Fig. 11. CF2 semantics is not resolution adequate.698P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700Fig. 12. Preferred prudent and complete prudent semantics are not resolution adequate.Proposition 69. For any argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5), ((cid:11)AF(cid:20)∈RES(AF) GPE(AF(cid:20))) ⊆ GPE(AF).The remaining semantics fail to satisfy resolution adequacy in any form. To see this for grounded, idealand complete semantics consider again Fig. 10. First, it is easy to see that UR(AF, GR) = UR(AF, ID) =UR(AF, CO) = {{α, δ}, {β, δ}}. Then, note that EGR(AF) = EID(AF) = {GE(AF)} = {ID(AF)} = {∅} whileECO(AF) = {∅, {α, δ}, {β, δ}}. As a consequence, for any S ∈ {GR, ID, CO} it holds that UR(AF, S) (cid:5)E∩ ES (AF),E2∈ES (AF) E2. Therefore UR(AF, S) (cid:5)E ES (AF) for any skepticism relationsince(cid:19)E.E1∈UR(AF,S) E1 = {δ} (cid:6) ∅ =(cid:11)(cid:11)As for CF2 semantics, consider Fig. 11 where RES(AF) = {AF1, AF2}. First, it is easy to see that {α, β3, β5, γ } ∈E∈ECF2(AF) E. Then it can be noted that ECF2(AF1) = {α, β2, β4, β6, δ}, whileECF2(AF) therefore, in particular, δ /∈(cid:11)(cid:6){β1, β3, β5, δ}, {β1, β4, δ}, {α, β2, β4, β6, δ}, {α, β2, β5, δ}, {α, β3, β6, δ}(cid:7)Thus δ ∈E∈UR(AF,CF2) E and as a consequence UR(AF, CF2) (cid:5)E∩ ECF2(AF).Finally, the example of Fig. 12 rules out preferred prudent and complete prudent semantics. In fact the sets ofpreferred prudent and complete prudent extensions of AF include {α, γ } and {δ}. Given RES(AF) = {AF1, AF2}, wenote that there is a unique preferred prudent (and complete prudent) extension of AF1, namely {α, δ}, and a uniquepreferred prudent (and complete prudent) extension of AF2, namely {α, γ }. Then the intersection of the extensions ofthe argumentation frameworks in RES(AF), namely {α}, is not included in the intersection of the extensions of AF,which is the empty set.ECF2(AF2) =(cid:11)7. Discussion and conclusionsWe have provided several general criteria for principle-based evaluation of extension-based argumentation seman-tics and applied them to a significant range of both “traditional” and more recent approaches. As to our knowledge,in the literature there are no other examples of such a systematic and extensive assessment of existing semantics pro-posals. In fact, example-based and/or pairwise comparisons are most commonly found, as discussed in Section 1. Ithas to be remarked, however, that the issue of formulating general principles for argumentation semantics is receivingan increasing attention in very recent years. Caminada and Amgoud [11] have discussed the issue of defining generalrationality postulates for argumentation. In particular, the postulates of closeness under strict rules and consistency ofextensions have been introduced, showing that there are argumentation systems where they are violated. Since thesepostulates are defined at the level of the language where arguments are explicitly constructed while our analysis liesat a more abstract level, this kind of work, while sharing the same spirit, represents a complementary and possiblysynergic research line with respect to ours.At a more specific level, relationships with some of the criteria we have introduced can be found in the literature.Defense related properties, namely admissibility and reinstatement, have often been used to compare argumentationsemantics, at least at an informal level. We have provided a systematic formal characterization of these notions,including stronger and weaker versions, which, as to our knowledge, have not been considered before in the literature.In a similar line, Caminada has recently tackled the issue of providing postulates for the notion of reinstatement inP. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700699the context of labellings of argumentation frameworks [10]. It turns out that the basic postulates on labeling providean equivalent characterization of complete extensions, while adding other minimality/maximality requirements onemay obtain a characterization of other Dung’s semantics. While in the present paper we are dealing with extension-based rather than labeling-based argumentation semantics, extending the definition of the criteria we propose to thecase of labeling-based semantics represents an interesting issue for future work. As to the directionality property, therelated criterion of relevance has been proposed in [9] when discussing the differences between stable and semi-stablesemantics. Given an argumentation framework AF = (cid:3)A, →(cid:5) an argument α is relevant with respect to β if and onlyif there is an undirected path from α to β in AF. Actually relevance is an equivalence relation, whose classes coincidewith the partition of the (undirected) defeat graph into its connected components. A semantics satisfies the relevancecriterion if the state of an argument is not affected by the presence of irrelevant arguments. Relevance can be regardedas a weaker form of the directionality criterion where only the existence but not the direction of attack relations is takeninto account. As to adequacy criteria, starting from an analysis of hierarchical argumentation frameworks Modgil [18]has proposed, as already mentioned in Section 4.4, a general requirement for argumentation semantics, based on thenotion of resolution of an argumentation framework and expressed as an if-and-only-if condition. We have shown thatone of the directions of the condition is a special case of the criterion of skepticism adequacy, previously proposedin [3] and extended here, while we have generalized the other direction of the condition introducing the criterion ofresolution adequacy.From the application of evaluation criteria it has emerged that, with different degrees, every literature semanticsviolates some of the proposed criteria. Not all these violations are undesirable by themselves. For instance, some ofthem may be ascribed to the fact that some criteria are not strictly required (as in the case of I-maximality) or are toodemanding (as in the case of strong admissibility). Other violations derive from deliberate design choices in order toachieve some desired behavior: this is the case, for instance, of CF2 semantics where admissibility and reinstatementare given up to achieve a “symmetric” treatment of odd- and even-length cycles. Grounded semantics is the closestto the goal of satisfying all the criteria, as it only violates the criterion of resolution adequacy in its various forms.At a general level, the situation sketched above stresses the problem of identifying which criteria are more suitablefor different application domains and/or reasoning styles. A recent example of this kind of investigation is providedby the analysis carried out in [21] where it is suggested that in certain contexts epistemic reasoning is skeptical whilepractical reasoning is credulous. At a more technical level, one may raise the question whether the proposed criteriaare incompatible altogether. Answering this question will be the subject of future work.AcknowledgementsWe are indebted to the anonymous referees and to the editors of this special issue for their helpful comments andsuggestions.References[1] L. Amgoud, C. Cayrol, A reasoning model based on the production of acceptable arguments, Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelli-gence 34 (1–3) (2002) 197–215.[2] P. Baroni, M. Giacomin, Solving semantic problems with odd-length cycles in argumentation, in: Proceedings of the 7th European Conferenceon Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty (ECSQARU 2003), in: Lecture Notes Artif. Intell., vol. 2711,Springer-Verlag, Aalborg, Denmark, 2003, pp. 440–451.[3] P. Baroni, M. Giacomin, Evaluating argumentation semantics with respect to skepticism adequacy, in: Proceedings of the 8th EuropeanConference on Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty (ECSQARU 2005), Barcelona, 2005, pp. 329–340.[4] P. Baroni, M. Giacomin, On principle-based evaluation, comparison, and design of extension-based argumentation semantics, Technical report,University of Brescia, Italy, 2007.[5] P. Baroni, M. Giacomin, G. Guida, Towards a formalization of skepticism in extension-based argumentation semantics, in: Proceedings of the4th Workshop on Computational Models of Natural Argument (CMNA 2004), Valencia, Spain, 2004, pp. 47–52.[6] P. Baroni, M. Giacomin, G. Guida, SCC-recursiveness: a general schema for argumentation semantics, Artificial Intelligence 168 (1–2) (2005)165–210.[7] T.J.M. Bench-Capon, Persuasion in practical argument using value-based argumentation frameworks, Journal of Logic and Computation 13 (3)(2003) 429–448.[8] M. Caminada, For the sake of the argument; explorations into argument-based reasoning, PhD thesis, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, 2004.[9] M. Caminada, Semi-stable semantics, in: P.E. Dunne, T. Bench-Capon (Eds.), Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Computa-tional Models of Arguments (COMMA 2006), IOS Press, Liverpool, UK, 2006, pp. 121–130.700P. Baroni, M. Giacomin / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 675–700[10] M. Caminada, On the issue of reinstatement in argumentation, in: Proceedings of the 10th European Conference on Logics in ArtificialIntelligence (JELIA 06), Springer, Liverpool, UK, 2006, pp. 111–123.[11] M. Caminada, L. Amgoud, An axiomatic account of formal argumentation, in: Proceedings of the Twentieth National Conference on ArtificialIntelligence (AAAI-05), American Association for Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA, 2005, pp. 608–613.[12] S. Coste-Marquis, C. Devred, P. Marquis, Prudent semantics for argumentation frameworks, in: Proceedings of the 17th IEEE InternationalConference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI 2005), IEEE Computer Society, Hong Kong, China, 2005, pp. 568–572.[13] S. Coste-Marquis, C. Devred, P. Marquis, Sémantiques prudentes pour les systèmes d’argumentation, in: Proceedings of the 15th CongressAFRIF-AFIA Reconnaissance des Formes et Intelligence Artificielle (RFIA 2006), Tours, F, 2006.[14] P.M. Dung, On the acceptability of arguments and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic reasoning, logic programming, and n-person games,Artificial Intelligence 77 (2) (1995) 321–357.[15] P.M. Dung, P. Mancarella, F. Toni, A dialectic procedure for sceptical, assumption-based argumentation, in: P.E. Dunne, T. Bench-Capon(Eds.), Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Computational Models of Arguments (COMMA 2006), IOS Press, Liverpool, UK,2006, pp. 145–156.[16] J.F. Horty, Skepticism and floating conclusions, Artificial Intelligence 135 (1–2) (2002) 55–72.[17] H. Jakobovits, D. Vermeir, Robust semantics for argumentation frameworks, Journal of Logic and Computation 9 (2) (1999) 215–261.[18] S. Modgil, Hierarchical argumentation, in: Proceedings of the 10th European Conference on Logics in Artificial Intelligence (JELIA 06),Springer, Liverpool, UK, 2006, pp. 319–332.[19] J.L. Pollock, How to reason defeasibly, Artificial Intelligence 57 (1) (1992) 1–42.[20] H. Prakken, Intuitions and the modelling of defeasible reasoning: some case studies, in: Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop onNon-Monotonic Reasoning (NMR 2002), Toulouse, France, 2002, pp. 91–102.[21] H. Prakken, Combining sceptical epistemic reasoning with credulous practical reasoning, in: P.E. Dunne, T. Bench-Capon (Eds.), Proceedingsof the 1st International Conference on Computational Models of Arguments (COMMA 2006), IOS Press, Liverpool, UK, 2006, pp. 311–322.[22] H. Prakken, G.A.W. Vreeswijk, Logics for defeasible argumentation, in: D.M. Gabbay, F. Guenthner (Eds.), Handbook of Philosophical Logic,second ed., Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 2001.[23] R. Reiter, A logic for default reasoning, Artificial Intelligence 13 (1–2) (1980) 81–132.[24] B. Verheij, Two approaches to dialectical argumentation: admissible sets and argumentation stages, in: Proceedings of the Eighth DutchConference on Artificial Intelligence (NAIC’96), Utrecht, NL, 1996, pp. 357–368.[25] G.A.W. Vreeswijk, Interpolation of benchmark problems in defeasible reasoning, in: Proceedings of the 2nd World Conference on the Funda-mentals of Artificial Intelligence (WOCFAI 95), Paris, France, pp. 453–468.