Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590www.elsevier.com/locate/artintOn the notion of concept IMichael FreundLaLICC, University of Paris Sorbonne, 28 rue Serpente, 75006 Paris, FranceReceived 25 September 2006; received in revised form 11 September 2007; accepted 15 September 2007Available online 20 September 2007AbstractIt is well known that classical set theory is not expressive enough to adequately model categorization and prototype theory. Re-cent work on compositionality and concept determination showed that the quantitative solution initially offered by classical fuzzylogic also led to important drawbacks. Several qualitative approaches were thereafter tempted, that aimed at modeling member-ship through ordinal scales or lattice fuzzy sets. Most of the solutions obtained by these theoretical constructions however are ofdifficult use in categorization theory. We propose a simple qualitative model in which membership relative to a given concept fis represented by a function that takes its value in a finite abstract set Af equipped with a total order. This function is recursivelybuilt through a stratification of the set of concepts at hand based on a notion of complexity. Similarly, the typicality associated witha concept f will be described using an ordering that takes into account the characteristic features of f . Once the basic notions ofmembership and typicality are set, the study of compound concepts is possible and leads to interesting results. In particular, weinvestigate the internal structure of concepts, and obtain the characterization of all smooth subconcepts of a given concept.© 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Keywords: Categorization; Concept; Extension; Intension; Typicality; Membership; Modular orders; Fuzzy sets; Formal concepts analysis1. IntroductionIn this paper we propose a new framework for the study of some basic notions classically used in categorizationtheory. In particular, we shall be concerned with the problem of finding a suitable theoretical apparatus to model thenotions of membership and typicality that underlie prototype theory. It is well recognized since the work of EleanorRosch [18] that membership, for instance, is not an all-or-not matter: the classical set-theoretical or the two-valuelogic model are of therefore of little use to render count of most of the cognition process. This drove Zadeh and hisfollowers [24] and [25] to propose a representation of concepts by fuzzy sets, membership being modeled through areal function with values in the unit interval. Such a representation nevertheless lead to counterintuitive results: see forinstance the seminal papers of Kamp and Partee and of Osherson and Smith [12,16,17]. At a quite elementary level,for instance, it was observed that the membership degree relative to a compound concept could never be greater thanthe degree induced by any of its components, a result that cannot be accepted for both theoretical and experimentalreasons. Even for elementary concepts, the representation of concepts as quantitative fuzzy sets poses problems:vague concepts like to-be-an-adult or to-lie are given continuous values in the unit interval, but what does it meanE-mail address: Michael.Freund@paris4.sorbonne.fr.0004-3702/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2007.09.003M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590571to qualify somebody as adult ‘with degree .4837’? In particular, as observed by several authors (for instance [14])there is no reason why the same set–the unit interval—should serve as a uniform criterion, being invariably referredto as a measure of membership whatever the concept at hand. True, in practice membership is often evaluated throughstatistical data, and the membership degree identified with a simple frequency. But the fact that, say, 87 individualsout of 100 consider a car seat as a piece of furniture by no means involves that, in an agent mind, the membershipdegree of a car-seat relative to the concept to-be-a-piece-of-furniture is equal .87.These drawbacks led to various solutions which all aimed at replacing the primitive quantitative model by a qual-itative one: thus, attention focused on ordinal scales and on lattice fuzzy sets—see for instance [11] or [25]. For abrief analysis of the most recent work on this area, the reader may refer to [14] or [3]. However, we consider that thesolutions that were proposed are not fully adapted to model prototype theory, and that they cannot be easily exploitedto address the classical questions raised by categorization theory.In a different area, Peter Gärdenfors [9] or [8] proposed a geometrical model as a framework for concept theory:a concept is defined as a convex region of a multidimensional space, each dimension corresponding to a basic quality.Convexity is related with a notion of betweenness that is supposed to be meaningful for the relevant quality dimen-sions: if two objects are exemplars of a concept, such will be the case for any object that lies ‘between’ them. Thetypical instances of a concept are those which are located ‘near the center’ of the considered region. This Geometryof Thought, as the author calls it, provides interesting tracks in the analysis of concepts. However, it is mostly basedon quantitative notions, which we find not best appropriate to model the cognition process. Furthermore, it does notseem that the distinction between vague and sharp concepts is fully taken into account.For these reasons, we propose to revisit the basic notions linked with categorization theory and treat them froma qualitative point of view. Concerning membership, for instance, and rather than dealing with uniform gradationfunctions that take their values in the unit interval, we represent membership relative to a concept by a function whoseset of values depends on the chosen concept. This set is endowed with a total order that can be used to evaluate towhich degree a object falls under this concept. We think indeed that such a representation is the most adequate tomodel notions like: object x plainly falls under the concept f , object x falls definitely not under the concept f orobject x falls more than object y under the concept f . These notions, which are the basis of categorization theory, arealso the firsts one should deal with in order to understand the problems that arise with vague concepts: for instance,an agent may consider that an elevator is definitely less a vehicle than a chairlift, while being unable at the same timeto attribute a precise numerical membership degree to any of these items. We propose in this paper an example ofconstruction such an order, by making use of the set of defining features attached to the concepts at hand. Postulatingthe existence of such a set is part of most of the theories on categorization: see for instance [1,4,21,22] or morerecently [2], where a concept is assimilated with a set of properties which things that fall under the concept typicallyhave or are believed to have. These defining features, from the point of view of the agent, help understanding thechosen concept; they are individually necessary and collectively sufficient to decide whether or not an item is anexemplar of this concept. Given a vague concept f , we shall use this associated defining feature set to compare thef -membership of two items in the following way: an object x will be considered as falling less under f than an objecty if it falls less than y under the f -defining features. The circularity of this definition will be avoided by attributingto each concept a complexity level: the sharp concepts, those for which membership is an all-or-not matter, will begiven complexity level 0; at level 1, we shall rank all the vague concepts whose defining feature set only consistsof sharp concepts; at level 2, we will have the vague concepts whose defining feature set consists of concepts thathave complexity level equal to 0 or 1, and so on. This ranking will eventually render possible a recursive definition ofmembership, and, consequently, the construction of a membership order among the set of objects at hand.Having represented concepts by means of order-functions poses the problem of finding an adequate representationof the notion of typicality. Since the work of E. Rosch, a considerable amount of study has been carried out on thisnotion, and it is now widely accepted that, relative to a given concept, objects may be classified following their degreeof typicality. Although a precise and general definition of this typicality degree is still missing, one generally agrees onthe fact that such a degree has to faithfully reflect the number of characteristic features attached to the concept at hand,together with the relative pertinence, or the frequency, of these features [15, Chapter 2]. Nevertheless the attempts at arigorous construction are rare, and none of them seem to have gained general recognition. Besides, researchers in thisdomain restricted themselves to elementary cases, dealing with sharp concepts, for which membership is an all-or-notmatter, or with concepts with sharp features. In particular, they did not seem to be concerned with situations in whichthe typicality relative to a concept depends on the membership relative to another concept: in order to determine the572M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590relative typicality of a hen as a bird, for instance, they would not consider that it is necessary to first evaluate itsmembership degree relative to the concept to-fly. We think on the contrary that typicality must be determined throughmembership, and that these two notions are correlatedWe therefore propose the construction of a ‘typicality order’—in fact a partial preorder—clear and easy to evaluate,that faithfully conforms with our intuition. This order is meant to reflect a particular agent’s judgment at a precisetime. It is based on the agent’s choice, for each concept, of a an associated characteristic feature set, partially orderedthrough a salience relation that is meant to evaluate the relative importance of these features. The typicality of twoitems will be compared by investigating the characteristic features that apply to them, the way they apply to them, andtheir relative salience. Once we have completed the construction of the typicality order, it will be possible to definethe typical instances of a concept as those that have maximal order, that is those that fall under all the characteristicfeatures of this concept. This definition of typicality will then enable us to define the intension of a concept as the setof features that apply to all typical instances of the concept. Thus, the intension of a concept may be interpreted asthe set of characteristic features that agents belonging to a well-defined cultural environment would generally agreeto associate with this concept: it enlarges the more subjective notion of characteristic features sets.A coherent theory of typicality must be able to correctly address the problem of compound concepts. We shallshow that our formalism provides natural and intuitive answers concerning composed concepts, provided one departsfrom the idea that the logic of concepts boils down to a simple propositional calculus. Indeed we do not agree withthe commonly admitted postulate following which the negation of a concept, the conjunction or the disjunction of twoconcepts should be again a concept: we do not consider that not-to-be-an-apple or (to-be-an-apple)&(to-be-a-pear)are concepts. Consequently, we believe that the treatment of such sentences, which clearly goes beyond the limitsof the elementary concept theory we are dealing with, should be addressed only after a coherent logical frameworkfor categorization has been proposed. In the present work, we shall therefore content ourselves with a language thatonly admits a single partial operator, the determination connective, which is meant to represent the determinationof a principal concept by a secondary one: for instance, the concept to-be-a-green-apple is the determination of theprincipal concept to-be-an-apple by the secondary one, to-be-green. Concept determination is not compositional,except in some limit cases: this means that neither the membership, nor the typicality relative to a composed conceptcan be directly evaluated through a computation of the corresponding magnitudes of its components. However, itremains possible to determine the typical order, hence the typical instances of a composed concept, via the typicalityorders induced by its components. This result is important as it can be considered as an answer to the compositionalityproblem.1.1. Plan of this paperAfter introducing in Section 2 the framework we are going to work in and recall the distinction between sharpand vague concepts, we shall introduce in Section 3 the membership orders and functions associated with elementaryconcepts. In Section 4, we shall present the determination connective and extend the membership order to compoundconcepts. We shall then turn to typicality, and build in Section 5 the typicality order associated with elementaryand compound concepts. In Section 6, we show how the notion of smooth subconcepts can be formalized through thedetermination connective, and we propose an interpretation of our results in the language of Formal Concept Analysis.Section 7 is a conclusion in which we discuss our future work.2. Concepts and objectsWe denote by O the universe of discourse, which we may see as the set of all objects, real or fictive, that anagent has at his disposal. Together with this set, we suppose given a set F of concepts. These concepts constitute theelementary items on which the agent builds its reasoning process, and they reflect its knowledge on the world at agiven time. A concept applies to an object if it describes a property that this object possesses, or if it is an attributeof this object. For instance, the concept to-be-a-fruit applies to the object an-apple. We will say indifferently that theconcept f applies to the object x, that x falls under f , or that x is an instance of f . In the classical theory, wherecategories were modeled through set theory, membership relative to a concept was an all-or-none matter: an objectcould not partially fall under a concept. This perspective was also that of Frege [5], for whom concepts were defined asone-place predicates having a bivalent membership truth function. With prototype theory and the evidence that thereM. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590573existed vague concepts (e.g. to-be-a-lie, to-be-an-adult, to-be-employed, to-be-a-sand-heap etc.), it became clear thatthis primitive notion of concepts had to be enlarged and that membership was a question of degree, rather than anall-or-none matter. As observed in [12], “We all have strong intuitions that the concepts encoded by many natural-language predicates are vague; whether something is a chair, or is red, does not seem to be an all-or-none matter buta matter of degree; there may be some clear positive cases and some clear negative cases, but there are many unclearcases in between.”Sharp concepts are defined as those for which membership is an all-or-not matter: an object simply falls or doesnot fall under such a concept, without the possibility of taking intermediate values. To-be-a-human-being, to-be-a-tooth-brush, to-be-an-even-integer may provide examples of sharp concepts. This definition has nevertheless to beunderstood as tightly related with a given agent’s point of view, and we shall always consider that we work from aparticular subjective perspective, and at a particular time: the same concept may appear as sharp to a non-expert agentwhile being considered as vague for an expert. For vague concepts, membership is indeed not an all-or-not-matter:such are for instance the concepts to-be-a-lie, to-be-poor, to-be-employed, to-be-a-weapon-of-mass-destruction orto-be-a-mammal. Indeed, politeness sometimes drives us to make compliments that, although not sincere, cannot beconsidered as real lies; to be poor or to be employed is clearly a matter of degree; a gun is more a WMD than a knife;and the platypus is and is not a mammal. Of course, opinions may differ whether a given concept should be consideredas a sharp or a vague one, but, and this is the important point, it is well recognized that both kinds of conceptsexist. An interesting suggestion of [1] is that, for noun concepts, the opposition between nominal and non-nominalcategories reflects the duality between vague and sharp concepts: nominal categories can be defined through theirdefining features, and may therefore give rise to vague concepts, while non-nominal cannot. Non-nominal categoriesmay be themselves divided between natural kind categories (e.g.: the category of tigers or of games) and artifactcategories (e.g.: the category of hammers, walls, cars). Note that the distinction between nominal and natural kindconcepts is far from being evident: a same concept may be considered as nominal for an expert, and as non-nominalfor a non-expert agent. For instance, the concept to-be-a-bird is undoubtedly of a natural kind for a child, but it mayturn later to a nominal one once the child has learnt that all and only those animals that have beak and feathers are tobe considered as birds. In deciding whether the concept to-be-a-bird is or not a sharp concept, we have therefore tofirst analyze which of these two concepts we are referring to: an agent aware that birdhood may be defined throughthe sum of a certain number of conditions, will consider to-be-a-bird a vague concept: the octopus, for instance willbe more a bird than the bat, since the octopus has a beak. On the other hand, for a child, to-be-a-bird is bond to be asharp concept, and the penguin will simply not be a member of the category, while the bat will.In the present work, we shall not address the problem of determining which concepts are vague and which are not.We shall only be concerned with the problem of finding an adequate model that correctly describes how the notion ofmembership is used in a given agent’s behavior.3. Membership for elementary conceptsIn the original fuzzy logic model, a membership degree function is attributed to each concept, measuring howaccurately this concept applies to the objects at hand. This degree however is not explicitly present in an agent’s mind:this is so for example for young children, for whom notions like real numbers or unit interval are totally meaningless.Nevertheless, given a concept, the agent will be generally able to decide whether two objects have the same or differentmembership degrees, and which one, in the latter case, has higher degree: for instance, the agent may decide that theconcept to-be-a-piece-of-furniture applies more to a car-seat than to a blackboard, without being able at the sametime to attribute a numerical membership degree to any of these items. In other words, the agent associates with eachconcept f an implicit notion of a membership order. It is this order we now want to build.We shall first deal with elementary concepts, leaving the case of compound concepts in the next section. In orderto correctly define a suitable notion of membership for vague concepts, we start from the widely accepted theoryfollowing which each such concept f is given together with a finite auxiliary set Δf which, from the point of view ofthe agent, includes all the features that explain or illustrate f , helping differentiating it from its neighboring concepts.For instance, for the concept to-be-a-bird, the corresponding Δf may consist of the concepts to-be-a-vertebrate,to-have-a-beak and to-have-feathers; for the concept to-be-a-tent, it may list the features to-be-a-shelter, to-be-made-of-cloth. We interpret Δf as the set of defining features an agent or a group of agents would associate with f . The setsΔf may be seen as the outputs a dictionary or an encyclopedia would return when given vague concepts as inputs.574M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590The elements of Δf are supposed to be less complex than the root concept f : in the agent’s mind, they constitutean help for the understanding of f . This notion of complexity will be now given a precise meaning by attributing acomplexity level c(f ) to the set F of concepts at hand in the following way:• Sharp concepts are given complexity level 0.• If Δf consists of sharp concepts, set c(f ) = 1.• If c(g) has been defined for all concepts g of Δf , set c(f ) = 1 + Max(c(g))g∈Δf .We shall make the assumption that this procedure attributes a well-defined complexity level to every element of F .In other words, our theory only applies to a set F that consists of concepts that either are sharp, or can be recursivelydefined through sharp concepts. Such concepts may be qualified as constructible. As a matter of fact, most of theelementary concepts one commonly deals with are constructible, with small complexity level, and we could havemade the assumption that the set of concepts at hand solely consists of concepts f of level less than 3. However wefind it more convenient to work in a more general framework, as the results are not more difficult to establish.It may be the case that some elements of Δf are more important than others, when considered as a help for definingor illustrating f : for instance, given the concept to-be-a-bird, an agent may think that the feature to-have-wings is moresalient than the feature to-be-an-animal, while both features may be part of the same set Δf . Thus, it is necessary toendow each set Δf with a (possibly empty) salience relation that reflects the relative importance of its elements asdefining features of f . In its most general form, such a relation will be represented by a strict partial order >f . Thisorder has to be taken into account when comparing the f -membership of two items: an object x that falls under themost salient defining features of f will be considered a better instance of f than an object y that only falls undersome non-salient defining feature of f .We can now proceed to the construction of the membership preorder relation (cid:3)μf , which will be defined on theset of objects O, and to the construction of the membership function ϕf , which will take its values in a finite totallyordered set (Af , <f ). We shall omit the subscripts when there is no ambiguity. We begin with the simplest case ofsharp concepts:Definition 1. For every elementary sharp concept f , Af is the set {0, 1}, and ϕf the function: ϕf (x) = 1 if x fallsunder f and ϕf (x) = 0 otherwise. The associated membership preorder is defined by x (cid:3)μf y if ϕf (x) (cid:2) ϕf (y).The membership preorder and the membership function relative to an arbitrary elementary concept f will be nowdefined by induction on c(f ). This will be done in two steps.3.1. The elementary membership orderDefinition 2. Let f be an elementary concept, and suppose that the finite totally ordered sets (Ag, <g) and themembership functions ϕg have been defined for all elementary concepts g such that c(g) < c(f ). The relation (cid:3)μf isthen defined by:f y if for any concept h of Δf such that ϕh(y) <h ϕh(x), there exists a concept k of Δf , k >f h, such thatx (cid:3)μϕk(x) <k ϕk(y).The relation (cid:3)μf thus compares the ways objects inherit the defining features of f , while taking into accountthe relative salience of these features. We will say that a preorder of this type is induced by the (ordered) set Δf .In the particular case where the salience order on Δf is empty, the relation boils down to: x (cid:3)μf y if and only ifϕh(x) (cid:2)h ϕh(y) for all h in Δf , that is if and only if no defining feature of f applies more to x than to y.The hypothesis that, for k ∈ Δf , the membership functions ϕk take their value in a totally ordered set guaranteesthe transitivity of the relation (cid:3)μf . More precisely we have the following result:Lemma 1. For any elementary concept f , the relation (cid:3)μf is a partial preorder on O.M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590575Proof. We have to prove that (cid:3)μf is a reflexive and transitive relation. Reflexivity is immediate. For transitivity,suppose that x, y and z are three objects such that x (cid:3)μf z. Supposing thatthere exists a concept h of Δf such that ϕh(z) < ϕh(x), we have to prove the existence of a concept k ∈ Δf , k moresalient than h, such that ϕk(x) < ϕk(z). We make a proof by cases:f z. We want to show that x (cid:3)μf y and y (cid:3)μ• Suppose first that ϕh(x) (cid:2) ϕh(y). Then we have ϕh(z) < ϕh(y), and there exists therefore a concept k of Δf ,k >f h, such that ϕk(y) < ϕk(z). We can suppose that k is maximal in Δf for this property (Δf is a finite set). Ifϕk(x) (cid:2) ϕk(y), we get ϕk(x) < ϕk(z) and we are done. If ϕk(y) < ϕk(x), the hypotheses imply that there exists aconcept g in Δf , g >f k such that ϕg(x) < ϕg(y). We cannot have ϕg(z) < ϕg(y), otherwise there would exist aconcept l in Δf , l >f g, such that ϕl(y) < ϕl(z), which would contradict the maximality of k. We have thereforeϕg(y) (cid:2) ϕg(z) and it follows that ϕg(x) < ϕg(z) as desired.• Suppose now that we have ϕh(y) < ϕh(x). There exists k ∈ Δf , k >f h, such that ϕk(x) < ϕk(y). Again, we cansuppose that k is maximal in Δf for these properties. If ϕk(y) (cid:2) ϕk(z), we get ϕk(x) < ϕk(z), as desired. If onthe contrary we have ϕk(z) < ϕk(y), there exists a concept g in Δf , g >f k, such that ϕg(y) < ϕg(z). As before,the maximality of k implies that we necessarily have ϕg(x) (cid:2) ϕg(y). It follows that ϕg(x) < ϕg(z), and the proofis complete. (cid:2)Let us denote by ≺μstrict partial order on O.f the relation: x ≺μf y iff x (cid:3)μf y and not y (cid:3)μf x. It follows from the above lemma that ≺μf is aExample 1. Let f be the concept to-be-a-bird, and suppose that, from the point of view of an agent, its definingfeature set is given by Δf = {to-be-an-animal, to-have-two legs, to-lay-eggs, to-have-a-beak, to-have-wings}, all ofthese concepts being considered as sharp concepts for the agent. Suppose also that the salience order is given by:to-lay-eggs >f to-have-two-legs, to-have-a-beak >f to-lay-eggs and to-have wings >f to-lay-eggs.Let r, m, t, b and d respectively stand for a robin, a mouse, a tortoise, a bat and a dragonfly, and let us comparetheir relative birdhood. In order to determine the induced membership order, we first build the following array:animaltwo-legslay-eggsbeak wingsrobinmousetortoisebatdragonfly(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)f r, m ≺μf t, and m ≺μWe readily check that d ≺μf d, since the concept to-have-two-legs under which the bat falls, contrary to the dragonfly, is dominated by the concept to-lay-eggs that applies tothe dragonfly and not to the bat. On the other hand, we do not have d (cid:3)μf b, as nothing compensates the fact thatthe dragonfly lays eggs and the bat does not. This yields b ≺μf d. We also remark that the tortoise and the bat areincomparable, that is, we have neither b (cid:3)μf b. The strict f -membership order induced on these fiveelements is thus given by the following Hasse diagram:f t, nor t (cid:3)μf b. Note that we have b (cid:3)μWe have therefore m ≺μf b ≺μf d ≺μf r and m ≺μf t ≺μf r.We can now precisely translate the notion of membership: an object x will be considered as falling under f if x isf -maximal in O. We shall denote by Ext f , the extension of f , the set of all such objects.≺μ576M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590We close this paragraph with a technical lemma:Lemma 2. The double inequality x (cid:3)μf y and y (cid:3)μf x holds if and only if ϕh(x) = ϕh(y) for all concepts h of Δf .f y and y (cid:3)μProof. If ϕh(x) = ϕh(y) for all concepts h of Δf , we have clearly x (cid:3)μf x. Conversely, suppose thatx (cid:3)μf x. If we had not ϕh(x) = ϕh(y) ∀h ∈ Δf , there would exist a concept h of Δf such that ϕh(x) (cid:6)=ϕh(y), and we could choose h with maximal salience for this property. We would have for instance ϕh(x) <h ϕh(y).But since y (cid:3)μf x, there would exist k ∈ Δf , k more salient than h, such that ϕk(y) <k ϕk(x), thus contradicting thechoice of h. (cid:2)f y and y (cid:3)μ3.2. The membership functionIt is clear that the ordering given by the relation (cid:3)μf is not connected: given two objects x and y, it may wellhappen that neither x (cid:3)μf , tobuild, a membership function ϕf that fairly translates the notion of a degree of f -membership. This function willsatisfy ϕf (x) < ϕf (y) whenever x ≺μf y: in a sense, this is the best one can hope (see [13] and her discussion on theimpossibility for order relations to correctly represent vagueness). For this purpose, we shall proceed in a way thatparallels, though in different context, a construction we proposed in [6].f x. It is nevertheless possible, starting from the strict partial order ≺μf y, nor y (cid:3)μGiven an object x, we say that x initializes a membership chain of length n if it is possible to find n objectsx1, x2, . . . , xn with last term xn ∈ Ext f , such that x ≺μf x1 ≺μf xn. For instance, any element x ∈ Ext finitializes a chain of length 0, and any object that does not fall under f initializes an membership-chain of strictlypositive length l (cid:2) |Af ||Δf |. In a sense, the length of such a chain measures how distant x is from the set Ext f . Notethat, given an object x, the existence and the length of such a chain is determined by the concepts and the objects theagent has at his disposal. Each link of a chain corresponds for this agent to a real (or a fictive) given object, togetherwith some given concepts of the universe at hand.f x2 ≺f · · · ≺μDefinition 3. The membership distance μf (x) of an object x to Ext f is the maximal length of a membership chaininitialized by x.The distance of x to Ext f is therefore an integer that is equal to 0 if and only if x falls under f . This measure willnow be used for the definition of the membership function:Definition 4. Let ∼ be the relation x ∼ y if μf (x) = μf (y). Denote by Af = O/ ∼ the associated quotient set andϕf the canonical map from O onto Af . Then the relation of total order (cid:2)f on Af is defined by ϕf (x) (cid:2)f ϕf (y) ifμf (x) (cid:3) μf (y).Example 2. We take again example 1 and the Hasse diagram giving the membership order induced by the conceptto-be-a-bird on the set {robin, tortoise, bat, mouse, dragonfly}:Let us now compare the respective membership values taken by the membership function: we have μf (t) = 1f r. Similarly,f r. Since the bat fallsf r then yieldsf d ≺f r, but this is not a chain of maximal length. For instance,because, to our knowledge, there exists no oviparous animal a that has a beak and satisfies t ≺μwe have μf (d) = 1, since, to our knowledge, there exists no animal a(cid:8) such that d ≺μunder three out of the five elements of Δf we have necessarily μf (b) < 3, and the inequality b ≺μf b ≺μμf (b) = 2. As for the mouse, we have m ≺μf a(cid:8) ≺μf a ≺μf d ≺μM. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590577noting that men have two legs, we also have the chain m ≺μf r, where h denotes a-human. This showsthat μf (m) (cid:3) 4, and thus μf (m) = 4 since we cannot have μf (m) > 5. Putting all this together, we come finally toϕf (m) < ϕf (b) < ϕf (t) < ϕf (r) and ϕf (t) = ϕf (f l).f d ≺μf h ≺μf b ≺μRemark 1. It would be easy to normalize the set Af and obtain an ordered set isomorphic to a finite subset of theunit interval [0, 1]. For example, we may take for ϕf the f -membership degree δμ, whereN μf , the membership width of f , is the length of the longest f -membership chain initialized by an object. Such asolution however is misleading, as it attributes the same scale of values to different concepts, which we would have noreason to treat uniformly. Also, it may lead to fallacious comparisons and artificial problems, comparing for instancethe degree of membership of an object x relative to a concept f with that of an object y relative to a concept g.f defined by: δμ= 1 − μfN μffRemark 2. The greatest element of Af is equal to ϕf (x), where x is an arbitrary element of Ext f . Its least elementis equal to ϕf (z), z being any object such that μf (z) = N μf .We have now fully defined the notion of membership for concepts of arbitrary complexity. Observe that one easilyrecovers the characterization of Δf as a set of features that are individually necessary and collectively sufficient foran object to be considered as an instance of f : for this, we only need to assume that there exists at least an object thatfalls under all the elements of Δf .Proposition 1. Let f be an elementary concept and x an object. Then x falls under f if and only if x falls under everyconcept of Δf .Proof. It is clear that if an object x falls under all the elements of Δf , x is ≺μf -maximal and therefore falls under f .Conversely, suppose x does not fall under all the elements of Δf , and let y be an element that falls under the elementsof Δf . Such an element exists by our assumption. We claim that we have x ≺μf y: indeed, since the elements ϕh(y) aremaximal in Ah for all concepts h ∈ Δf we have readily x (cid:3)f y. Next, it is clear that we do not have y (cid:3)f x, because,by the choice of x, there exists a concept h ∈ Δf such that ϕh(x) <h ϕh(y) while it is impossible to find a conceptg ∈ Δf such that ϕg(y) <g ϕg(x). This yields x ≺μf -maximal. (cid:2)f y, as claimed, and we have shown that x is not ≺μCorollary 1. It holds x ≺μf y whenever y falls under f and x does not.Proof. Straightforward. (cid:2)4. Membership for compound conceptsIt is sometimes possible to determine a concept f by a concept g, and get in this way a compound conceptg (cid:4) f that represents the determination of f by g. This determination is most often translated by an adjective-nounor an adjectived verb combination (e.g. the concepts to-be-a-carnivorous-animal, to-be-a-flying-bird, to-be-a french-student), but it can also be rendered by a noun-noun combination (e.g. to-be-a-pet-fish, to-be-a-barnyard-bird). Unlikeordinary conjunction, the connective (cid:4) cannot be defined for arbitrary pairs of concepts (f, g): for instance, if g isthe concept to-fly, f the concept to-be-an-artefact and h the concept to-be-a-prime-number, it makes sense, or atleast it may make sense for some agent, to form the concept g (cid:4) f , which one would interpret as the concept to-be-a-flying-artefact; but it would be meaningless to try and form the concept g (cid:4) h corresponding to the ‘concept’to-be-a-flying-prime-number: in this case the determination connective simply cannot operate.It is important to keep in mind that we consider only the conceptual combinations that are intersective: the objectsthat fall under the composed concept g (cid:4) f are exactly the ones that both fall under f and under g. Thus, and tomention the most known examples, the determination connective cannot be used to form complex concepts like to-be-a-brick-factory, to-be-a-criminal lawyer or to-be-a-topless-district: indeed, a brick factory need not be a factory thatis made out of bricks, a criminal lawyer not a layer that is a criminal, and a topless district not a district that is topless.The determination connective (cid:4) operates on a principal concept to which it attributes some secondary propertiesusually expressed by an intersective (extensional) adjective or an instersective adjectived verb (see for instance [12]578M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590for the distinction between intersective and non-intersective adjectives). Typically, in the compound concept g (cid:4) f ,the main concept f is defined through a predicate of the type to-be-x, while the accessory concept g is of the formto-have-the-property-y. We shall say that f is g-determinable when the concept g (cid:4) f can be formed. This requiresthat the sets Ext f and Ext g have a non-empty intersection: there must exist elements of O, that is real or fictiveobjects, that fall under f and under g.Note that even when correctly defined, the determination connective does not necessarily enjoy the same propertiesas its analogue in propositional logic: unlike conjunction, indeed, it is not supposed to satisfy commutativity (forexamples and discussion, and in particular the distinction between games-that-are-sports and sports-that-are-games,see [23]).We proceed now to the definition of the membership preorder associated with a compound concept. Our con-struction is motivated by the fact that, unlike the elementary concepts, compound concepts are not usually associatedin with a defining feature set: dictionaries or encyclopedias do not provide answers on queries about noun–noun oradjective–noun combinations. For this reason, we shall directly propose the construction of a composed member-ship preorder (cid:3)μg while taking into account thepreeminence of the principal concept f .g(cid:4)f that naturally stems from the membership preorders (cid:3)μf and (cid:3)μDefinition 5. Let f and g be elementary concepts and (cid:3)μthat f is g-determinable. Then the relation (cid:3)μf and (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f is defined by: x (cid:3)μg their associated membership preorders. Supposeg(cid:4)f y if x (cid:3)μf y and either x ≺μf y, or x (cid:3)μg y.Thus, priority is given to the concept f , translating the fact that f is supposed so play the principal role in thecomposed concept.It may be helpful to consider the relation (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f as induced by a set of fictive defining features:Lemma 3. Let >f and >g be the salience orders on Δf and Δg. Denote by (cid:2)Δ the set Δf ∪ Δg equipped with the‘salience’ order > that agrees with >f on Δf , agrees with >g on Δg − Δf , and satisfies k > h for all k’s in Δf andh’s in Δg − Δf . Then (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f is induced by (cid:2)Δ.In other words, (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f agrees with the relation (cid:3) defined by: x (cid:3)y iff for any concept h of (cid:2)Δ such that ϕh(y) <hϕh(x), there exists a concept k of (cid:2)Δ, k > h, such that ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y).f y, or x (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f y, so that x (cid:3)μProof. Suppose first that we have x (cid:3)μg y. We want to show that x (cid:3) y.Given any element h of (cid:2)Δ such that ϕh(y) <h ϕh(x), we have to prove the existence of an element k of (cid:2)Δ, k > h,such that ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y). If h ∈ Δf , there exists k ∈ Δf , k >f h, such that ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y), and, since k > h, we aredone. Suppose therefore h ∈ Δg − Δf . If x ≺μf y, we do not have y (cid:3)μf x, and there exists therefore a concept k ∈ Δfsuch that ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y). But then, we have k > h, and, again, we are through. Finally, if x (cid:3)μg y, since h ∈ Δg, thereexists k ∈ Δg, k >g h such that ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y). This implies k > h and provides again the desired result.f y and either x ≺μConversely, suppose that we have x (cid:3) y. To prove that x (cid:3)μf y: if ϕh(y) <h ϕh(x) forsome concept h of Δf , there exists k ∈ (cid:2)Δ, k > h such that ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y). But, by the construction of the preorderf y, or x (cid:3)μ>, we have necessarily k ∈ Δf and k >f h. This shows that x (cid:3)μg y.Suppose we have not x ≺μg y, let h be aconcept in Δg such that ϕh(y) <h ϕh(x). Since x (cid:3) y, there exists a concept k of (cid:2)Δ, k > h, such that ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y).By Lemma 2, we cannot have k ∈ Δf . We have therefore k ∈ Δg and k >g h, which completes the proof. (cid:2)f y. It remains to prove that either x ≺μf x. To prove that x (cid:3)μf y. We have then the double inequality x (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f y, we first show that x (cid:3)μf y and y (cid:3)μClearly, the process of defining the complex relation (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f from (cid:3)μf and (cid:3)μg can be iterated, and used to define themembership orders associated with the determination of arbitrary concepts.Corollary 2. The relation (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f is reflexive and transitive on O.Proof. Clear. (cid:2)M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590579We let ≺μg y.x ≺μg(cid:4)f be the strict partial order induced by (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f . We have thus x ≺μg(cid:4)f y iff x (cid:3)μf y and either x ≺μf y orLemma 4. Let f be a g-determinable concept. Then• (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f• ≺μf⊆(cid:3)μf ;g(cid:4)f .⊆≺μProof. Straightforward. (cid:2)As in the case of elementary concepts, we will say that an object x falls under the concept g (cid:4) f if x is ≺μg(cid:4)f -maximal.Let us again denote by Ext(g (cid:4) f ) the extension of the concept g (cid:4) f , that is the set of all objects that fall underg (cid:4) f . As we shall see, this set can be directly retrieved from the extensions Ext f and Ext g:Proposition 2. Ext(g (cid:4) f ) = Ext g ∩ Ext f .Proof. Suppose x ∈ Ext f ∩ Ext g. If x were not ≺μtherefore we would have either x ≺μx ∈ Ext g.f z, contradicting the hypothesis x ∈ Ext f , or x ≺μg(cid:4)f -maximal, there would exist an object z such that x ≺μg(cid:4)f z;g z, contradicting the hypothesisConversely, suppose that is x ≺μf -maximal, and therefore falls under f . Supposewe do not have x ∈ Ext g, and let z be any element of Ext g ∩ Ext f (such an element exists since f is g-determinable).Then we have x (cid:3)μg(cid:4)f -maximal. Clearly, x is then ≺μg(cid:4)f z, contradicting the ≺μg(cid:4)f -maximality of x. (cid:2)g(cid:4)f z and x ≺μg z, that is x ≺μThe above proposition helps determining in which cases a compound concept may be a sharp concept. This clearlyoccurs in the particular case of the determination f (cid:4) f of a sharp concept by itself, as readily follows from thedefinitions. In fact, the only case where a compound concept g (cid:4) f is a sharp concept occurs when both f and g aresharp concepts having same extension:Proposition 3. g (cid:4) f is a sharp concept if and only if both f and g are sharp concepts that satisfy Ext f = Ext g.g(cid:4)f y ≺μg(cid:4)f y ≺μf z, that is x ≺μProof. Suppose first that g (cid:4) f is a sharp concept. Then it is immediate that f is also a sharp concept, otherwise,we would find three objects x, y and z verifying x ≺μf y ≺μg(cid:4)f , contradicting the sharpness ofg (cid:4) f . Observe now that we have Ext f ⊆ Ext g. Indeed, if this were not the case, there would exist an object y suchthat y ∈ Ext f and y /∈ Ext g. But then we would have x ≺μg(cid:4)f for any objects x and z such that x /∈ Ext fand z ∈ Ext g, thus contradicting our sharpness hypothesis on g (cid:4) f . Observe also that if the converse inclusionExt g ⊆ Ext f did not hold, taking u /∈ Ext g, v ∈ Ext g − Ext f and w ∈ Ext f , we would have u ≺μg(cid:4)f w,which would again contradict the sharpness of g (cid:4) f . Finally, to see the sharpness of g, suppose given three objectsr, s and t such that r ≺μg t. Since r ≺μg s and Ext f ⊆ Ext g, we cannot have r ∈ Ext f ; similarly, we see thats cannot lie in Ext f . Since f is a sharp concept, we have therefore r (cid:3)μf t. Putting all this together, we getr ≺μg(cid:4)f s ≺μConversely, suppose now that f and g are sharp concepts with Ext f = Ext g. We have to prove that g (cid:4) f is sharp.g(cid:4)f -f y,But if this were not the case, we could find three objects x, y and z such that x ≺μg(cid:4)f z. Being not a ≺μmaximal element, we would have y /∈ Ext(g (cid:4) f ), hence y /∈ Ext f . By the sharpness of f , this would imply x ⊀μand thus x ≺μg y. By the sharpness of g, this would finally lead to y ∈ Ext g, hence y ∈ Ext f , a contradiction. (cid:2)g(cid:4)f t, contradicting again the sharpness of g (cid:4) f .g(cid:4)f v ≺μg(cid:4)f y ≺μf s (cid:3)μg s ≺μIt follows from Proposition 2 that all objects that fall under g (cid:4) f necessarily fall under f (and also under g).Hence, we may naturally ask whether the compound concept g (cid:4) f could be considered as a subconcept of f . In theperspective of fuzzy logic, a concept k is a subconcept of h if and only ϕk (cid:2) ϕh, that is, if and only if it holds, for allobjects x, ϕk(x) (cid:2) ϕh(x). In our model, this first supposes an embedding of the ordered set (Ah, (cid:2)h) in (Ak, (cid:2)k). We580M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590shall see that such is indeed the case for the sets Af and Ag(cid:4)f and that the compound concept g (cid:4) f may be thereforeconsidered as a subconcept of f .Lemma 5. For all x, μf (x) (cid:2) μg(cid:4)f (x).Proof. Suppose that for an object x, one has m = μg(cid:4)f (x) < μf (x) = n, and let x ≺μf xn be anx-membership f -chain of maximal length (xn ∈ Ext f ). Note that xn−1 /∈ Ext f . Let z be an element of Ext(g (cid:4) f ).By Lemma 4, we have xi ≺μg(cid:4)f xi+1 for i < n, and it follows that x ≺μg(cid:4)f xn−1 ≺g(cid:4)f z, is amembership g (cid:4) f -chain of length n, contradicting the hypothesis. (cid:2)g(cid:4)f x2 ≺g(cid:4)f · · · ≺μf x2 ≺f · · · ≺μg(cid:4)f x1 ≺μf x1 ≺μThis lemma shows that the range of the function μf is embedded in that of the function μg(cid:4)f . Identifying the setsAf and Ag(cid:4)f with these ranges then yields Ag(cid:4)f ⊆ Af . Since we have, for all x, μf (x) (cid:2) μg(cid:4)f (x), it follows, fromthis identification and from the very definition of ϕ, that ϕg(cid:4)f (x) (cid:2) ϕf (x), showing that g (cid:4) f is a subconcept of f .5. Typicality for elementary conceptsHow can our model render count of the fact that, inside a category, there exist elements that are more typical thanothers? It is because of this evidence that the classical view on categorization had to be given up: a concept couldnot be defined anymore by its extension or its associated membership function, because such a definition would notexplain the typicality effect. Membership orders and functions may be accurate enough to tell us that the penguin andthe robin are equally birds, or that the mouse is less a bird than the bat, but they will be unable to account for the factthat, as a bird, the robin is more typical than the penguin.We have therefore to complete and extend the formalism proposed in the preceding sections. The auxiliary set Δfthrough which an agent constructs the f -membership order is not sufficient on its own to fully capture the informationencoded by f : it becomes necessary to add a supplementary set, which will consist of the features that, from the agent’spoint of view, are bond to apply to all typical instances of the concept at hand, whatever significance this term maycarry for the agent.Together with each elementary concept f , we will therefore suppose given a finite set of characteristic features,χf , the elements of which consist of concepts that complete and illustrate the core information that may be providedby Δf . Note that χf ∩ Δf need not be the empty set. In particular, χf may include most, if not all, of the most salientelements of Δf . For instance, if f denotes the concept to-be-a-fruit, we may take for χf the set consisting of theelements to-grow-on-trees, to-be-sweet, to-be-raw-edible, to-yield-juice and to-have-a-seed, while Δf will consist ofthe two concepts to-be-a-vegetable and to-heave-seeds.As was the case for Δf , the characteristic set χf will be equipped with a (possibly empty) strict partial salienceorder, meant to compare the pertinence of two different characteristic features.Again, characteristic sets and salience orders are purely subjective items: they reflect the Weltanschaung of a givenagent at a given time. For example, the characteristic features associated with the concept to-be-a-bird may consist,for an agent, of the set {to-fly, to-have-feathers, to-live-in-the-trees, to-sing, to-have-wings}, in which the propertiesof flying or of having wings are given maximal salience. For another agent, however, the characteristic set of the sameconcept may consist of the elements {to-fly, to-have-feathers, to-be-oviparous, to build nests, to-have-a-beak}, theproperty of having wings being considered as more salient than that of flying.The idea of associating with every elementary concept its set of ‘characteristic’ features is due to Smith et al.[22], and the term is theirs. The authors took care to distinguish this set from the set of necessary features, this latterconsisting of all the essential properties associated with the concept at hand (see also [4] for the distinction betweennecessary features and defining features). For instance, to-fly is considered as a characteristic feature of the conceptto-be-a-bird but it is not an essential one, as it is possible to conceive birds that do not fly. On the contrary, to-have-abeak or to-be-warm-blooded are necessary features for this concept, as each of these properties is an essential one:one cannot conceive a bird that would not have a beak or that would be cold-blooded.Typicality relative to a concept f may be defined for arbitrary objects, and not only for elements Ext f : for instance,Rosch and Mervis [19] included non-members of categories in their typicality rating lists. Nevertheless, as observedin [10], typicality carries with it the assumption of a range restricted to category members. This is the position thatwe will adopt.M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–5905815.1. Typicality order for elementary conceptsIn order to grasp the notion of more or less typical objects, we propose the following definition, which parallelsthat of the membership order:Definition 6. Let f be an elementary concept, and x and y two elements of Ext f . We shall say that x is at most asf -typical as y, written x (cid:3)τf y, if for any concept h of χf such that ϕh(y) <h ϕh(x), there exists a concept k of χf , kmore salient than h, such that ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y).Note that in the general case, it may well happen that a less typical object x falls under a feature h ∈ χf that doesnot apply to y, provided there exists a more salient feature k ∈ χf that applies to y and not to x.It is important to observe that the above definition relates typicality relative to a concept with the characteristicfeatures of this concept, and only with them: it does not take into account the normality or the abnormality of theobjects at hand. To judge the typicality of a dog for instance, we do not have to examine whether it is blind, has awounded paw or lives with an artificial heart: there exists a clear distinction between the notions of typicality andnormality, and prototype theory only deals with the first one.Proposition 4. For all elementary concepts f , the relation (cid:3)τf is a partial preorder on Ext f .Proof. Analogue to that of Lemma 5.1. (cid:2)The strict partial order induced by (cid:3)τf will be denoted by ≺τf . We have therefore x ≺τf y iff x (cid:3)f y and not y (cid:3)f x.Example 3. Let us take for f the concept to-be-a-fruit and suppose that for a given agent the set χf consists of theconcepts to-grow-on-trees(tr), to-be-sweet(sw), to-be-raw-edible(ra), to-yield-juice(ju), to-have-a-skin(sk), togetherwith a salience order > given by: ra > tr, ra > ju, tr > ju, tr > sw, sk > ju and sk > sw. Consider the following sixfruits: a chestnut (ch), an olive (ol), a pepper (pe), a strawberry (st), an orange (or) and a tomato (to). For the sake ofsimplicity, we suppose our agent attributed them only extremal membership values:tr(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)cholpesttoorsw rajusk(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)The induced typicality order is then given by the following Hasse diagram:An important case that deserves to be mentioned occurs when the salience order on χf is a total order, a situationwe find in particular when the characteristic set is reduced to a single element—to-fly being for instance taken as theunique characteristic feature of to-be-a-bird.Proposition 5. Suppose the salience order >f on χf is a total order. Then (cid:3)τprecisely, given two exemplars x and y of Ext f , we have either x ≺τf y, or y (cid:3)τf is a total preorder on Ext f . Moref x, or ϕh(x) = ϕh(y) ∀h ∈ χf .582M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590Proof. Suppose indeed that the equality ϕh(x) = ϕh(y) is not satisfied for all elements of χf . Let k be the mostsalient concept of χf such that ϕk(x) (cid:6)= ϕk(y). We have for instance ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y). This yields x ≺τf y: indeed, forall concepts h of χf such that ϕh(y) <h ϕh(x), k is more salient than h and we have ϕk(x) <k ϕk(y). Note that wef x, because, by a proof similar to that of Lemma 2, this would yield ϕh(x) = ϕh(y) for all h ∈ χf .cannot have y ≺τThis shows that x ≺τf y as desired. (cid:2)Notation. For any subset X of Ext f , we shall denote by Xτ (f ) the set of ≺τof χf implies that Xτ (f ) (cid:6)= ∅ whenever X (cid:6)= ∅.f -maximal elements of X; the finitenessRemark 3. Contrary to what happened in the case of the membership order, the typicality order as we defined it doesnot require the preliminary use of a specific gradation function. The construction of a typicality gradation would beof course possible, defining first a typicality distance τf , a typicality width N τf , and a subsequent typicality degree δτfsimilarly to what was done in Section 3.2. It is interesting to note that, in the case where χf is given a total salienceorder, the resulting typicality degree faithfully translates the (total) typicality order ≺τf : in this case, we have indeedx ≺τf y iff δτf (x) < δτf (y).5.2. Typical elementsWe now come to the definition of the typical instances of an elementary concept f . We shall make the assumptionthat there always exists an exemplar of f that falls under all the elements of χf .Proposition 6. Let f be an elementary concept and x an element of Ext f . Then the two following properties areequivalent:• x falls under all the elements of χf ;• x is ≺τf -maximal in Ext f .Proof. Analogue to that of Proposition 1. (cid:2)We shall say that an object x is f -typical if it satisfies the properties of Proposition 6. For instance, and providedthat to-fly is a characteristic feature of birds, a hen will not be considered as a typical bird: indeed, it does not plainlyfall under the concept to-fly.Denoting by Typ f the set of f -typical objects, we have readily Typ f = (Ext f )τ (f ) =(cid:3)g∈χfExt g.Lemma 6. Given an f -typical element z, one has x ≺τf z for any instance x of f that is not typical.Proof. Straightforward from Proposition 6. (cid:2)Example 4. Consider the concept to-be-a-tree, and suppose that its characteristic set includes the concept to-have-deciduous-leaves. Suppose, on the other hand, that the concept to-be-a-conifer includes in its characteristic set theconcept to-have-evergreen-needles. It follows from our definition that the larch is atypical as a conifer, while typical asa tree. In our framework, typicality relative to a category does not depend from membership relative to a subcategory:for somebody ignoring that the larch is a conifer, its typicality as a tree makes no doubts. Similarly, a flying ostrichwill be considered as typical as a bird.The classical notion of intension can now be recovered from the typical instances of f :Definition 7. The intension Int f of a concept f is the set of all concepts g for which Typ f ⊆ Ext g.Note that f ∈ Int f and that χf ⊆ Int f .The intension of f is the set of features that apply to all typical instances of f . For instance, the concepts to-sing, to-fly, to-be-oviparous, to-have wings are elements of the intension of to-be-a-bird: all typical birds sing, fly,M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590583are oviparous and have wings. On the contrary, to-be-black or to-build-nests are not elements of Int f , because thereexists typical birds that are not black, like the robin, and typical birds that do not build nests, like the cuckoo. Wecan characterize the elements of Int f as describing features that apply to the good exemplars of f , or as propertiesthat are generally expected from f : ‘birds generally fly’, indeed, exactly means that the birds that do not fly must beconsidered as atypical. In this sense, we may interpret the elements of Int f as being induced by f , and analyze thelink between f and g as representing a relation of inference, which could be approached through the ordinary toolsof non-monotonic logics. It is this perspective that we shall develop in a forthcoming paper, where the properties oftypical induction, studied as a non-monotonic inference relation, will be studied and compared to the existing systems.Proposition 7. Typ f =(cid:3)g∈Int f Ext g.The proposition says that an object is f -typical if and only if it falls under all the concepts of Int f .Proof. If x is f -typical, it falls under every concept of Int f by definition of Int f . Conversely, if an object falls underevery concept of Int f , it falls under f and it also falls under every concept of χf . It is therefore f -typical. (cid:2)In a sense, the sets Int f and Ext f taken together characterize the concept f . Since the set Int f is dual of the setTyp f , we can equivalently characterize a concept by the sets Typ f and Ext f , which are subsets of O. Given two sharpconcepts f and g, we can therefore consider them as equivalent, (written f ≡ g) if they have same intension and sameextension. In the case of vague concepts, it is difficult to define such a notion of equivalence without also requiringthat the membership functions of f and g are isomorphic. The question then naturally arises of finding ‘natural’concepts f and g with Ext f = Ext g, Typ f = Typ g, but such that for some pair (x, y), one has ϕf (x) <f ϕf (y) andϕg(y) (cid:2)g ϕg(x). In the absence of such an evidence, we shall extend our notion of equivalence to elementary vagueconcepts, and write f ≡ g whenever f and g have same extension and same intension.6. Smooth subconcepts and concept determinationIn this final section, we propose to investigate the internal structure of concepts. The importance of this studyappears in most of the work dealing with categorization-level and hierarchies. We shall introduce the notion of smoothsubconcepts, and show that all these concepts are obtained through a specific kind of determination.6.1. SubconceptsAs observed at the end of Section 4, if g is a subconcept of f , we must have ϕg (cid:2) ϕf , and, consequently, Ext g ⊆Ext f .On the contrary, even if g is a subconcept of f , there may well exist no relationship between the sets Typ f andTyp g. As a matter of fact, the typicality orders respectively associated with f and g are most often incomparable, andthe corresponding typical sets may have an empty intersection: for instance, and as long as we consider penguins asexceptional birds, we will not be ready to accept as an exemplar of a typical bird any exemplar of a typical penguin.The subconcepts g for which Typ g ⊆ Typ f are therefore rather exceptional. We shall qualify these as smoothsubconcepts:Definition 8. A subconcept g of f is said to be smooth if it satisfies Typ g ⊆ Typ f .Thus, g is a smooth subconcept of f if any typical exemplar of g may be considered as typical relative to f . Notethat this condition is equivalent to χf ⊆ Int g, which can also be expressed by Int f ⊆ Int g.Example 5. The fact that we consider robins as typical birds means that any typical exemplar of a robin is a typicalexemplar of a bird. Thus, if g is the concept to-be-a-robin and f the concept to-be-a-bird, we have Typ g ⊆ Typ f : gis a smooth subconcept of f .584M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590We shall show in the next section how it is possible to characterize the smooth subconcepts of a given concept f .In fact we shall establish a representation theorem characterizing the smooth f -subconcepts as the determinations off by concepts that, in a way do not contradict f . But before addressing this problem, we have to study the typicalityassociated with compound concepts.6.2. The typicality of compound conceptsIt is clear that the instances of a composed concept g (cid:4) f that we may intuitively consider as typical of this concept,cannot be retrieved from the typical instances of f and the typical instances of g. A typical walking bird has nothingto do with a typical bird, and nothing to do with a typical walking animal either. More generally, the attributes that aretypically induced by a compound concept cannot be retrieved by the intensions of its components: green apples arebound to be sour, but to-be-sour is not a member of the intension of to-be-an-apple, nor a member of the intension ofto-be-green. Thus, no simple formula will enable us to deduce the typical elements of g (cid:4) f from the typical elementsof f and the typical elements of g.What conditions would we require to consider an object as typical relative to a compound concept of g (cid:4) f ?This question was experimentally addressed by [20], who showed that the context in which a concept appears affectsthe typicality of its instances. For instance, for somebody that works in the context to-live-in-a-barnyard, a chickenmay be considered as a typical bird, although, relative to the concept to-be-a-bird it is not. In our framework, theconcept to-be-a-bird taken in the context to-live-in-a-barnyard is simply represented by the determination (to-live-in-a-barnyard) (cid:4) (to-be-a-bird). Studying contextual typicality then amounts to determining the set Typ(g (cid:4) f ). Forthis, we need to define a suitable typicality order ≺τg(cid:4)f . Such an order will characterize the g (cid:4) f -typical elementsas maximal elements of Ext(g (cid:4) f ). Note that the primary role played by f in the composition g (cid:4) f implies thatthe g (cid:4) f -typical objects will be expected, before all, to be as typical as possible relative to f . Making use of thetypical-order relation ≺f , this amounts to saying that Typ(g (cid:4) f ) should be a subset of Ext(g (cid:4) f )τf , and we shouldhave therefore Typ(g (cid:4) f ) ⊆ (Ext g ∩ Ext f )τ (f ). But this sole condition is not sufficient to ensure (g (cid:4) f )-typicality. Tosee this, consider the following example: take for f the concept to-be-French and for g the concept to-live-in-U.S.A.Consider the case of Mr Dupont, a French traveler arrested on his arrival at Kennedy airport for drug traffic in 1998,condemned to 10 years jail, and since then detained in Red Onion prison, Virginia. Although typical as far as to-be-a-frenchman is concerned, and therefore an element of (Ext g ∩ Ext f )τ (f ), Mr Dupont is definitely not a prototypeof the concept to-be-a-Frenchman-living-in-the-States. For instance, it is clear that Mr Dupont is less representativeof this latter concept than Mr Martin, a French student who is now completing his PhD in Berkeley University ofCalifornia: this latter on the contrary may be seen as a typical relative to the concept (g (cid:4) f ). Thus, the order inducedby g (cid:4) f has to be chosen in such a way that it guarantee the typicality of all elements of ((Ext g ∩ Ext f )τ (f ))τ (g)).As we shall see now, a construction analogue to that of the membership order for compound concepts will do the job.Lemma 7. Let f and g be two elementary concepts wit associated typicality preorders (cid:3)τg-determinable, and define the relation (cid:3)τg(cid:4)f on Ext(g (cid:4) f ) by:f and (cid:3)τg. Suppose f isx (cid:3)τg(cid:4)f y if x (cid:3)τf y and either x ≺f y, or x (cid:3)τg y.Then (cid:3)τg(cid:4)f is a preorder on Ext(g (cid:4) f ) .Proof. Analogue to that of Lemma 2: (cid:3)τorder . (cid:2)g(cid:4)f is induced by the set (cid:2)χ =def χf ∪ χg equipped with the adequate salienceThe above construction provides a typicality preorder for the determination of an elementary concept f by anelementary concept g. It is clear that it can be recursively used for any compound concept k (cid:4) h, where k and h arearbitrary concepts.g(cid:4)f be the strict partial order associated with the relation (cid:3)τf y or x ≺τLet ≺τeither x ≺τWe shall denote by Typ(g (cid:4) f ) the set of ≺τThese elements will be considered as typical relative to the concept g (cid:4) f .f y andg(cid:4)f -maximal elements of X.g(cid:4)f -maximal elements of Ext(g (cid:4) f ): Typ(g (cid:4) f ) = (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (g(cid:4)f ).g y. For any subset X of Ext(g (cid:4) f ), we let Xτ (g(cid:4)f ) be the set of ≺τg(cid:4)f y if and only if x (cid:3)τg(cid:4)f , that is: x ≺τM. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590585It has been objected (J.A. Hampton, personal communication) that the model we propose for compound typicalitymay lead to counterintuitive results: for instance, given the concept to-be-an-Antarctic-bird and following our con-struction, the Antarctic gull will be shown to be more typical than the penguin, provided that to-fly is part of thecharacteristic set of to-be-a-bird. However, when referring to Antarctic birds, people will most often consider thepenguin as more typical than the gull. This apparent contradiction comes from the fact that, in people’s mind, thecategory of Antarctic birds is altogether perceived as opposed to the category of usual, or European, birds. Whenreferring to a member of the first category, one implicitly excludes the specimen that also lie in the second. Thisphenomena is even emphasized when typicality is concerned: a typical Antarctic bird is implicitly expected be muchdifferent from a usual bird. Thus the concept to-be-an-Antarctic-bird cannot be simply analyzed as the determinationof a concept by another, which would be the case for instance for the concept to-be-a-black-bird: it appears to conveymore information than would do a simple intersective combination.It is possible, as we did in the case of elementary concepts, to define the intension Int(g (cid:4) f ) of a compoundconcept g (cid:4) f as the set of all concepts h that apply to all elements of Typ(g (cid:4) f ): Int(g (cid:4) f ) = {h; Typ(g (cid:4) f ) ⊆ Ext h}.However, and contrary to what happened in the elementary case, there exist no duality between the sets Int(g (cid:4) f ) andTyp(g (cid:4) f ): the latter cannot be retrieved from the former, as was the case for elementary concepts (see Proposition 7).This comes from the fact that one may well find no object falling under all the elements of χf ∪ χg. For this reason,we have to refine of definition of equivalent concepts.Definition 9. Two concepts f and g are said to be equivalent, written f ≡ g, if Ext f = Ext g and Typ f = Typ g.The following result provides an upper and a lower bound for the set Typ(g (cid:4) f ):Proposition 8. ((Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ))τ (g) ⊆ Typ(g (cid:4) f ) ⊆ (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ).Proof. We first prove the second embedding. Let x be an element of Typ(g (cid:4) f ). If x /∈ (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ), there existsan element y ∈ Ext(g (cid:4) f ) such that x ≺τg(cid:4)f y, contradicting the choice of x. To prove thefirst inclusion, let x be an element of ((Ext(g (cid:4) f ))f )τ (g). If x were not ≺τg(cid:4)f -maximal in Ext(g (cid:4) f ), there would existan element y in Ext(g (cid:4) f ) such that x ≺τg(cid:4)f y. Since x ∈ (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ), we cannot have x ≺τf y, and it followsthat we must have x ≺τg y. But, from the second embedding, we have y ∈ (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ), and since x was chosen in((Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ))τ (g), the latter inequality is impossible. (cid:2)f y, and we have then x ≺τIn the particular case where the salience order on χf is total, the above proposition takes a simpler form:Proposition 9. Let f be g-determinable elementary concept with totally ordered associated characteristic set. ThenTyp(g (cid:4) f ) = ((Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ))τ (g).Proof. We only have to check that Typ(g (cid:4) f ) is a subset of ((Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ))τ (g). Let therefore x be an g (cid:4) f -typicalelement. By the above proposition, we know that x ∈ (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ). Suppose x where not ≺τg-maximal in this set.Then we would have x ≺τg z for some element z of (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ). But since the salience order on χf is total, the≺τg(cid:4)f z, which contradicts the choice of x. (cid:2)f z by Proposition 5. We have then x ≺τf -maximality of z implies x (cid:3)τIn this particular case, the proposition shows that, in order to get the typical elements associated with g (cid:4) f , onehas to simply choose among the most f -typical exemplars of Ext g (cid:4) f those that are also the most g-typical.Note that the typical representatives of the concept g (cid:4) f are generally not chosen among the elements of Typ f .g(cid:4)f is coherent with the intuitive definition of Typ(g (cid:4) f ), which has toProposition 9 shows that the definition of (cid:3)τinclude ((Ext g ∩ Ext f )f )g as a subset.Example 6. Let us take again Example 4 and take for f the concept to-be-a-tree and for g the concept to-be-a-conifer. By what we saw, the larch may be considered as f -typical, so it is an element of (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (f ). It is also≺g-maximal in this set, so the larch may be considered as g (cid:4) f -typical. It cannot be considered as f (cid:4) g-typical,though, because it is not an element of (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))τ (g): the pine tree, for example, is more g-typical than the larch.586M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590Proposition 10. Let f be a g-determinable concept and denote by (cid:3)(≺τThenf ) the restriction of ≺τf to the set Ext(g (cid:4) f ).• (cid:3)τ⊆(cid:3)τf ;g(cid:4)f• (cid:3)(≺τf ) ⊆≺τg(cid:4)f .⊆ (cid:3)τProof. The embedding (cid:3)τsuppose that x and y are elements of Ext g ∩ Ext f with x ≺τwould imply y (cid:3)τas desired. (cid:2)g(cid:4)ff directly follows from the definition of (cid:3)τf y. We have then x (cid:3)τg(cid:4)f . For the second part of the proposition,g(cid:4)f y. If we had y (cid:3)τg(cid:4)f x, thisg(cid:4)f yf x by the first part of the proposition, contradicting the choice of x and y. This shows that x ≺τRemark 4. If x is at most as typical as y relative to the concept g (cid:4) f , x will also be at most as typical as y relative tothe concept f . This conclusion does not hold for arbitrary subconcepts of f : the larch is less typical as a conifer thanthe pine tree, while more typical as a tree.Proposition 10 enables us to compare the typicality orders induced by f and g (cid:4) f ; it cannot be used however tocompare the resulting degrees (see Remark 3). On one hand, we may have δτg(cid:4)f (x), as happens for instancewhen x is f -typical and falls under g without being ≺g-maximal in (Ext(g (cid:4) f ))f ; on the other hand, we may alsohave δτg(cid:4)f (x), as is for the case when x is g (cid:4) f -typical but not f -typical (e.g. a striped apple). Thus our rep-resentation of typicality orders neither predicts, nor contradicts the well-known conjunction effect, [17] pp. 198–199,following which an object that falls under a compound concept g (cid:4) f will be often considered a ‘better example’ ofthe category g (cid:4) f than of the category f alone.f (x) > δτf (x) < δτFor an illustration of the conjunction effect, let us study the example of the striped apple that was discussed by [16]:Example 7. Let f be the concept to-be-an-apple, and g that of to-have-stripes. We suppose that N τf , the typicalitywidth of f (see Remark 3) is equal to 5. We may then attribute the value 6 to N τg(cid:4)f . We take for x a particular kindof apple that we suppose sour, without a stem, and with regular stripes on its surface. We let x1 be a second apple,similar to x except that it is not sour, and x2 be a third apple similar to x1 except that it has a stem. Finally, we denoteby x3 a typical apple. Note that x2 is g (cid:4) f -typical but is not f -typical. We have now x ≺g(cid:4)f x1 ≺g(cid:4)f x2, showingthat the (g (cid:4) f ) typicality distance of x is equal to 2, and its corresponding degree to 2/3. On the other hand, wehave x ≺f x1 ≺f x2 ≺f x3: indeed, x2 cannot be considered a typical apple because typical apples are not striped.It follows that the f -typicality distance of x is equal to 3 and its corresponding degree to 2/5. We have thereforeδτg(cid:4)f (x) > δτf (x): the degree of x relative to the compound concept g (cid:4) f is strictly greater than its degree relativeto f .As a first property of the determination connective, we observe it satisfies idempotence. It also satisfies associativity,provided the concepts h (cid:4) (g (cid:4) f ) and (h (cid:4) g) (cid:4) f are defined:Proposition 11. The following equivalences hold:• f (cid:4) f ≡ f ;• h (cid:4) (g (cid:4) f ) ≡ (h (cid:4) g) (cid:4) f .Proof. We have readily Ext(f (cid:4) f ) = Ext f and Typ(f (cid:4) f ) = Typ f , which proves the first part of the proposition.To prove the second equivalence, we have to check that Typ(h (cid:4) (g (cid:4) f )) = Typ((h (cid:4) g) (cid:4) f ). Let therefore x be a≺τh(cid:4)(g(cid:4)f )-maximal element of Ext h ∩ Ext g ∩ Ext f . If x were not (h (cid:4) g) (cid:4) f -maximal, there would exist y suchthat x ≺τg(cid:4)f y, and thereforeg y, or x ≺τg y and either x ≺τx ≺τh y.But the inequalities x (cid:3)τh(cid:4)(g(cid:4)f ) y, and the same conclusion is obtained ifwe suppose that x (cid:3)τf y and either x ≺τh(cid:4)(g(cid:4)f ) y, contradicting the choice of x. In the second case, we get x (cid:3)τh(cid:4)g y. In the first case, we get x ≺τf y, x (cid:3)τ(h(cid:4)g)(cid:4)f y, that is x (cid:3)τh y. In any case, this contradicts the choice of x.g(cid:4)f y, that is x ≺τg y yield x ≺τf y and x ≺τg y and x ≺τf y or x ≺τf y, x (cid:3)τM. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590587Conversely, suppose that x is an element of Typ((h (cid:4) g) (cid:4) f ). If x were not ≺τh(cid:4)(g(cid:4)f ) y. We would then have x (cid:3)τg(cid:4)f y and either x ≺τf y or x ≺τh y, x (cid:3)τf y and either x ≺τh y, which amounts to x ≺τg y, both leading to x ≺τelement y such that x ≺τwould have x (cid:3)τand x ≺τIf x (cid:3)τf y and either x ≺τh(cid:4)g y, which, together with x (cid:3)τh y, we get x ≺τg y and x ≺τf y or x (cid:3)τh(cid:4)(g(cid:4)f )-maximal, there would exist ang(cid:4)f y or x ≺τh y. In the first case, weg(cid:4)f y(h(cid:4)g)(cid:4)f y.(h(cid:4)g)(cid:4)f y, a contradiction. (cid:2)f y, we get directly x ≺τ(h(cid:4)g)(cid:4)f y. In the second case we have x (cid:3)τf y, leads again to x ≺τg y. If x ≺τWe shall now establish a necessary and sufficient condition for g (cid:4) f to be a smooth subconcept of f . Recall thath is a smooth subconcept of f if Typ h ⊆ Typ f . We first make a definition:Definition 10. A concept g is exceptional for f if Typ f ∩ Ext g = ∅.A concept g that is exceptional for f applies to no typical instances of f . For instance, the concept to-be-poisonousis exceptional for the concept to-be-a-fruit: indeed, no typical fruit is poisonous.Proposition 12. Let f be an elementary g-determinable concept. Then the following conditions are equivalent:1. g is not exceptional for f ;2. Typ(g (cid:4) f ) ⊆ Typ f ;3. Typ(g (cid:4) f ) = (Typ f ∩ Ext g)τ (g).Proof. Suppose first that g is not exceptional for f , and let x be an element of Typ(g (cid:4) f ). Denote by z an elementof Typ f ∩ Ext g. If x were not an element of Typ f , we would have x ≺f z (Lemma 6); since z ∈ Ext(g (cid:4) f ), thiswould contradict the ≺f -maximality of x in this set. This shows that 1 ⇒ 2. Conversely, suppose that we haveTyp(g (cid:4) f ) ⊆ Typ f and let z be an element of Typ(g (cid:4) f ). Then z is an element of Ext g ∩ Ext f and therefore of Ext g.We have thus z ∈ Typ f ∩ Ext g, showing that this set is not empty, and hence that g is not exceptional for f . We havetherefore 1 ⇔ 2 as desired.Supposing now Typ(g (cid:4) f ) ⊆ (Typ f ), let us show that Typ(g (cid:4) f ) = (Typ f ∩ Ext g)τ (g). Let x be an elementg y. Sinceg(cid:4)f y, contradicting the choice of x. We have therefore proven that Typ(g (cid:4) f ) ⊆ (Typ f ∩g(cid:4)f -maximal, wef -maximality of x, this would imply y ∈ Typ fof Typ(g (cid:4) f ). If x were not ≺τf y, this would yield x ≺τx (cid:3)τExt g)τ (g). To prove the converse inclusion, take an element x of (Typ f ∩ Ext g)τ (g). If x were not ≺τwould have x ≺τand x ≺τg-maximal in Typ f ∩ Ext g, there would exist y ∈ (Typ f ∩ Ext g) with x ≺τg(cid:4)f y for some element y ∈ Ext g ∩ Ext f . By the ≺τg y, thus contradicting the choice of x. (cid:2)Example 8. Any typical exemplar of the concept to-be-a-black-bird is also a typical exemplar of the concept to-be-a-bird, because there exist typical birds that are black. The conclusion would be of course different if we were tolook for typical pink birds: the American flamingo, for instance, can be considered as a typical pink bird, but not as atypical bird.Corollary 3. Typ(g (cid:4) f ) = (Typ f )τ (g) for all g ∈ Int f .Proof. Since g ∈ Int f , we have Typ f ⊆ Ext g, and the result immediately follows from Proposition 12. (cid:2)The corollary means that, g being a characteristic feature of f , the typical exemplars of g (cid:4) f will be the mostg-typical among the typical exemplars of f .We finally mention as a particular case the only example where the set Typ(g (cid:4) f ) can be directly recovered fromthe sets Typ f and Typ g.Proposition 13. Typ(g (cid:4) f ) = Typ g ∩ Typ f if and only if Typ f ∩ Typ g (cid:6)= ∅.For instance, a typical black olive is nothing but a typical olive that is typically black.Proof. Straightforward. (cid:2)588M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590The above results now provide an easy characterization of the smooth subconcepts of a given concept. Recall thata subconcept h of f is smooth if Typ h ⊆ Typ f .Theorem 1. A concept h is a smooth subconcept of f if and only if there exists a concept g, not exceptional for f ,such that h ≡ g (cid:4) f .Proof. We already notice that (g (cid:4) f ) is a subconcept of f . If g is not exceptional for f , we have Typ(g (cid:4) f ) ⊆ Typ fby Proposition 12, and it follows that g (cid:4) f is a smooth subconcept of f . Conversely, let h be a smooth subconceptof f . Then f is h-determinable. Note that h is not exceptional for f , since f applies to any typical instance of h. Weclaim that h ≡ h (cid:4) f . Indeed, observe first that Ext(h (cid:4) f ) = Ext h ∩ Ext f = Ext h, since Ext h ⊆ Ext f . Next, since his smooth, and by Proposition 13, we have Typ(h (cid:4) f ) = Typ h ∩ Typ f = Typ h. This shows that the concepts h andh (cid:4) f have same intention and same extension, and they are therefore equivalent. (cid:2)6.3. Concepts and formal concept analysisThe determination connective (cid:4) provides interesting results concerning the structure of the lattice of formal sub-concepts. Let us first recall the basic definitions of Formal Concept Analysis [7].A formal context is a triple (G, M, I ) where G is a set of objects, M a set of attributes and I a binary relationbetween these two sets: the property (g, m) ∈ I is to be read as “the object g has the attribute m”. A formal conceptof the formal context (G, M, I ) is then defined as a pair (A, B) with A ⊆ G and B ⊆ M such that• B = {m ∈ M | (g, m) ∈ I ∀g ∈ A};• A = {g ∈ G | (g, m) ∈ I ∀m ∈ B}.The set B is therefore the set of all attributes of M that are shared by all objects of A; similarly, A is the set of allobjects that have in common all the attributes of B. In the terminology of FCA, A is called the extent of the formalconcept (A, B), and B is its intent.If (A, B) and (A(cid:8), B(cid:8)) are formal concepts, one has clearly A ⊆ A(cid:8) iff B(cid:8) ⊆ B. When this is the case, (A, B)is called a formal subconcept of (A(cid:8), B(cid:8)), and (A(cid:8), B(cid:8)) a formal superconcept of (A, B). This will be denoted by(A, B) (cid:2) (A(cid:8), B(cid:8)). The set L(G, M, I ) of formal concepts of a given formal context (G, M, I ) is then partially orderedthrough the relation (cid:2). An important result in FCA is that this ordered set (L(G, M, I ), (cid:2)) has the structure of acomplete lattice.In our framework, the formal context we are working in is the triple (O, F, I ), where O is the set of objects thatform the universe of discourse of a given agent, F his set of concepts and I the relation (x, h) ∈ I iff x falls under h.A formal concept then consists of a couple (A, B) where A is a set of objects, B a set of (individual) concept suchthat• f ∈ B if and only if f applies to all elements of A;• x ∈ A if and only if x falls under all concepts of B.In particular, Proposition 7 shows that for any elementary concept f , (Typ f, Int f ) is a formal concept.We can also define another class of formal concepts, using the notion of extension: let indeed Ess f , the essenceof f , be defined as the set of all concepts g that apply to the elements of Ext f . Then, it appears that (Ext f, Ess g) isa formal concept:Proposition 14. For each concept f , denote by Ess f the set of concepts g such that Ext f ⊆ Ext g. Then one hasExt f =(cid:3)g∈Ess g Ext g.Proof. If x is an element of Ext f , x falls under every concept of Ess f by definition of Ess f . Conversely, if x fallsunder every element of Ess f , x must fall under f , since f ∈ Ess f .M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590589Elements of Ess f may be seen as essential in the sense that they necessarily apply to all objects that fall under f .It does not mean however that Ess f should be identified with the set of core properties of f , which determine themeaning of f : to take Fodor’s example [4], each of the concepts to-have-a-backbone and to-have-a-heart is part ofthe essence of the other, but none can be considered as a core feature of the other.The above result shows that for all concepts f (Ext f, Ess f ) is a formal concept. This enables us to reinterpret thenotion of smooth subconcepts in the framework of Formal Concept Analysis:Proposition 15. Given two elementary concepts f and h, h is a smooth subconcept of f if and only if (Ext h, Ess h) (cid:2)(Ext f, Ess f ) and (Typ h, Int h) (cid:2) (Typ f, Int f ).Proof. Immediate. (cid:2)Let us write h (cid:3) f whenever h is a smooth subconcept of f . This clearly yields an order relation in the quotientset F/ ≡, because one has h ≡ f whenever h (cid:3) f and f (cid:3) h. We do not obtain a lattice structure, as was the case inFormal Concept Analysis for the relation (cid:2), but it is possible to find a greatest lower bound for (cid:4)-commuting concepts,and this greatest lower bound turns out to be their mutual determination.Theorem 2. Let f and g be mutually determinable concepts. Then f and g admit common lower bounds if and onlyif Typ f ∩ Typ g (cid:6)= ∅. When this condition is satisfied, they admit a greatest lower bound, which, up to equivalence, isequal to the determination of f by g.Proof. If f and g admit a common lower bound, there exists a concept k such that k (cid:3) f and k (cid:3) g. By definition,we have then Typ k ⊆ Typ f ∩ Typ g, and this latter set is therefore non-empty. Conversely, suppose that we haveTyp f ∩ Typ g (cid:6)= ∅. Then it follows from Proposition 13 that Typ(g (cid:4) f ) = Typ g ∩ Typ f . As we also have Ext(g (cid:4) f ) =Ext g ∩ Ext f , we see that g (cid:4) f (cid:3) f and g (cid:4) f (cid:3) g. The determination of f by g is therefore a lower bound of theset {f, g}. Note that we have g (cid:4) f ≡ f (cid:4) g. Suppose now that, k is a smooth subconcept of f and of g, that is k (cid:3) fand k (cid:3) g. We have then Exp k ⊆ (Exp f ∩ Exp g) and (Typ k ⊆ Typ f ∩ Typ g). This shows that k (cid:3) g (cid:4) f . We havetherefore proven that, up to equivalence, g (cid:4) f is the greatest lower bound of the set {f, g}. (cid:2)7. Conclusion and future workThe present work is a first an attempt at setting a suitable framework for the study of categorization and typicalityproblems. It is essentially centered on the basic notions of membership and typicality, these notions being definedthrough the defining feature set and the characteristic set attached to a concept. We obtained in this way a coherenttheory for elementary and compound concepts. This preliminary work will be completed in a forthcoming paper, inwhich we shall show how the study of non-monotonic logics applies to categorization and prototype theory, providinginteresting and non-trivial results. We shall indeed reinterpret the notions of membership and typicality in the frame-work of inference relations: thus, the set Ess f will be considered as a set of consequences of f , and the relationg ∈ Ess f , denoted f (cid:16) g, will play the role of a consequence relation. Similarly, typical inference will be denotedby f |∼ g, and will be studied as a non-monotonic inference relation. We shall show that, relative to the determinationconnective (cid:4), the relation (cid:16) behaves like the classical monotonic consequence relation, while |∼ satisfies propertiesanalogous to those of rational inference relations. The tools recently developed in the study of preferential and rationalinference relations will therefore appear as a useful complement for the study of classical problems in categorizationtheory, leading in particular to interesting results concerning the theory of contextual inference.AcknowledgementsI wish to thank the referees for their careful reading of the preliminary versions of this paper, and the very con-structive remarks, criticisms and suggestions they proposed to improve the quality and the presentation of this work.I also thank the Editor for having accepted to publish this somewhat atypical work in Artificial Intelligence.590M. Freund / Artificial Intelligence 172 (2008) 570–590References[1] M.E. Barton, L.K. Komatsu, Defining features of natural kinds and artifacts, Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 18 (5) (1989) 433–447.[2] A.C. Connolly, J.A. Fodor, L.R. Gleitman, H. Gleitman, Why stereotypes do not even make good defaults, Cognition 103 (1) (2007) 1–22.[3] D. Dubois, F. Esteva, L. Godo, H. Prade, An information-based discussion of vagueness, in: Cohen, Lefebvre (Eds.), Handbook of Catego-rization in Cognitive Science, 2005, pp. 892–913.[4] J. Fodor, Concepts: A potboiler, Cognition 50 (1994) 95–113.[5] G. Frege, Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete formelsprache des reinen denkens, Halle, 1879.[6] M. Freund, Preferential reasoning in the perspective of poole default logic, Artificial Intelligence 98 (1998) 209–235.[7] B. Ganter, R. Wille, Formal Concept Analysis—Mathematical Foundations, Springer, 1999.[8] P. Gärdenfors, Conceptual Spaces: The Geometry of Thought, MIT Press, 2000.[9] P. Gärdenfors, Conceptual spaces as a framework for knowledge representation, Mind and Matter 2 (2) (2004) 9–27.[10] J.A. Hampton, Similarity-based categorisation and fuzziness of natural categories, Cognition 65 (1998) 137–165.[11] G.V. Jones, Stacks not fuzzy sets: An ordinal basis for prototype theory of concepts, Cognition 12 (1982) 281–290.[12] H. Kamp, B. Partee, Prototype theory and compositionality, Cognition 57 (1995) 129–191.[13] R. Keefe, Vagueness by numbers, Mind 107 (427) (1998) 565–579.[14] J.W.T. Lee, Ordinal decomposability and fuzzy connectives, Fuzzy Sets and Systems 136 (2003) 237–249.[15] G. Murphy, The Big Book on Concepts, MIT Press, 2002.[16] D. Osherson, E.E. Smith, On the adequacy of prototype theory as a theory of concepts, Cognition 11 (1981) 237–262.[17] D. Osherson, E.E. Smith, On typicality and vagueness, Cognition 64 (1997) 189–206.[18] E. Rosch, Cognitive representations of semantic categories, Journal of Experimental Psychology 104 (1975) 192–233.[19] E. Rosch, C.B. Mervis, Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of categories, Cognitive Psychology 7 (1975) 573–605.[20] E.M. Roth, E.J. Shoben, The effect of context on the structure of categories, Cognitive Psychology 15 (1983) 346–378.[21] E.E. Smith, D.L. Medin, Categories and Concepts, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1981.[22] E.E. Smith, E.J. Shoben, L.J. Rips, Structure and process in semantic memory: A featural model for semantic decisions, PsychologicalReview 81 (1974) 214–241.[23] G. Storms, P. De Boeck, J.A. Hampton, X. Van Mechelen, Predicting conjunction typicalities by component typicalities, Psychonomic Bulletinand Review 6 (4) (1999) 677–684.[24] L.A. Zadeh, Fuzzy sets, Information and Control 8 (1965) 338–353.[25] L.A. Zadeh, A note on prototype theory and fuzzy sets, Cognition 12 (1982) 291–297.