Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026Contents lists available at ScienceDirectArtificial Intelligencewww.elsevier.com/locate/artintOn the measure of conflicts: Shapley Inconsistency Values ✩Anthony Hunter a,∗, Sébastien Konieczny ba Department of Computer Science, University College London, UKb CRIL – CNRS, Université d’Artois, Francea r t i c l ei n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:Received 16 July 2007Received in revised form 9 June 2010Accepted 9 June 2010Available online 18 June 2010Keywords:Inconsistency managementInconsistency toleranceInconsistency measuresConflict resolutionParaconsistencyShapley valuesThere are relatively few proposals for inconsistency measures for propositional belief bases.However inconsistency measures are potentially as important as information measures forartificial intelligence, and more generally for computer science. In particular, they can beuseful to define various operators for belief revision, belief merging, and negotiation. Themeasures that have been proposed so far can be split into two classes. The first class ofmeasures takes into account the number of formulae required to produce an inconsistency:the more formulae required to produce an inconsistency, the less inconsistent the base.The second class takes into account the proportion of the language that is affected by theinconsistency: the more propositional variables affected, the more inconsistent the base.Both approaches are sensible, but there is no proposal for combining them. We addressthis need in this paper: our proposal takes into account both the number of variablesaffected by the inconsistency and the distribution of the inconsistency among the formulaeof the base. Our idea is to use existing inconsistency measures in order to define a gamein coalitional form, and then to use the Shapley value to obtain an inconsistency measurethat indicates the responsibility/contribution of each formula to the overall inconsistencyin the base. This allows us to provide a more reliable image of the belief base and of theinconsistency in it.© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionThere are numerous works on reasoning under inconsistency. One can quote for example paraconsistent logics, argu-mentation frameworks, belief revision and fusion, etc. All these approaches illustrate the fact that the dichotomy betweenconsistent and inconsistent sets of formulae that comes from classical logics is not sufficient for describing these sets. Asshown by these works, normally when given two inconsistent sets of formulae, they are not trivially equivalent. They donot contain the same information and they do not contain the same contradictions.Measures of information à la Shannon have been studied in logical frameworks (see for example [31]). Roughly theyinvolve counting the number of models of the set of formulae (the less models, the more informative the set). The problemis that these measures regard an inconsistent set of formulae as having a null information content, which is counter-intuitive(especially given all the proposals for paraconsistent reasoning). So generalizations of measures of information have beenproposed to solve this problem [39,53,36,32,24].In comparison, there are relatively few proposals for inconsistency measures [22,27,35,32,28,18]. However, these mea-sures are potentially important in diverse applications in artificial intelligence, such as belief revision, belief merging, andnegotiation, and more generally in computer science. Already some provisional studies indicate that measuring inconsistency✩This paper is a revised and extended version of the paper “Shapley Inconsistency Values” presented at KR’06.* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: a.hunter@cs.ucl.ac.uk (A. Hunter), konieczny@cril.fr (S. Konieczny).0004-3702/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2010.06.0011008A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026may be seen to be a useful tool in analysing a diverse range of information types including news reports [29], integrity con-straints [18], software specifications [9,10,42], and ecommerce protocols [12].The current proposals for measuring inconsistency can be classified in two approaches. The first approach involves“counting” the minimal number of formulae needed to produce the inconsistency. The more formulae needed to producethe inconsistency, the less inconsistent the set [35]. This idea is an interesting one, but it rejects the possibility of a morefine-grained inspection of the (content of the) formulae. In particular, if one looks to singleton sets only, one is back to theinitial problem, with only two values: consistent or inconsistent.The second approach involves looking at the proportion of the language that is touched by the inconsistency. This allowsus to look inside the formulae [27,32,18]. This means that two formulae viewed as two whole belief bases (singleton sets)can have different inconsistency measures. But, in these approaches one can identify the set of formulae with its conjunction(i.e. the set {ϕ, ϕ(cid:3)} has the same inconsistency measure as the set {ϕ ∧ ϕ(cid:3)}). This can be sensible in some applications, butthis means that the distribution of the contradiction among the formulae is not taken into account.What we propose in this paper is a definition for inconsistency measures that allow us to take the best of the twoapproaches. This will allow us to build inconsistency measures that are able to look inside the formulae, but also to takeinto account the distribution of the contradiction among the different formulae of the set.The above-mentioned approaches define inconsistency measures, i.e. functions that associate a number to each belief base.These global base-level measures are sufficient for a variety of applications. But in some cases we need an evaluation ona finer level, that is for each formula of the base. We call these functions, that associate a number to each formula of abase, inconsistency values. Such a function allows us to identify which are the most problematic formulae of a belief basewith respect to the inconsistency. This can be very useful for applications such as belief revision or negotiation. Theseinconsistency values provide a more detailed view of the inconsistency, and they can be used to defined new inconsistencymeasures which more accurately reflect the inconsistency of the whole base.To this end we will use a notion that comes from coalitional game theory: the Shapley value. This value assigns toeach player the payoff that this player can expect from her utility for each possible coalition. The idea is to use existinginconsistency measures (that allow us to look inside the formulae) in order to define a game in coalitional form, and thento use the Shapley value to obtain an inconsistency measure with the desired properties. From these inconsistency values, itis possible to define new interesting inconsistency measures. We present these measures, we state a set of logical propertiesthey satisfy, and we show that they are more interesting than the other existing measures.The plan of the paper is as follows: After some preliminaries in the next section, Section 3 introduces inconsistencymeasures that count the number of formulae needed to produce an inconsistency. Section 4 presents the approaches wherethe inconsistency measure depends on the number of variables touched by the inconsistency. Section 5 introduces theproblem studied in this paper and illustrates that the naive solution is not adequate. Section 6 gives the definition ofcoalitional games and of the Shapley value. Section 7 introduces the inconsistency measures based on Shapley value. Thenwe study the logical properties of these measures in Section 8, and we provide a complete axiomatization of a particularmeasure in Section 9 through a set of intuitive axioms. Section 10 sketches the possible applications of those measures forreasoning and for belief change operators. Finally Section 11 concludes by giving perspectives of this work and its possibleapplications for belief change operators.2. PreliminariesWe will consider a propositional language L built from a finite set of propositional symbols P . We will use a, b, c, . . . todenote the propositional variables, and Greek letters α, β, ϕ, . . . to denote the formulae. An interpretation is a total functionfrom P to {0, 1}. The set of all interpretations is denoted W . An interpretation ω is a model of a formula ϕ, denoted ω |(cid:5) ϕ,if and only if it makes ϕ true in the usual truth-functional way. Mod(ϕ) denotes the set of models of the formula ϕ, i.e.Mod(ϕ) = {ω ∈ W | ω |(cid:5) ϕ}. We will use ⊆ to denote the set inclusion, and we will use ⊂ to denote the strict set inclusion,i.e. A ⊂ B iff A ⊆ B and B (cid:2) A. Let A and B be two subsets of C , we note C = A ⊕ B if A and B form a partition of C, i.e.C = A ⊕ B iff C = A ∪ B and A ∩ B = ∅. We will denote the set of real numbers by R.A belief base K is a finite set of propositional formulae. More exactly, as we will need to identify the different formulaeof a belief base in order to associate them with their inconsistency value, we will consider belief bases K as vectors offormulae. For logical properties we will need to use the set corresponding to each vector, so we suppose that there is afunction mapping each vector K = (α1, . . . , αn) into ¯K , the set {α1, . . . , αn}. As it will never be ambigous, in the followingwe will omit the graphical distinction and write K as both the vector and the set.Let us note KL the set of belief bases definable from formulae of the language L. A belief base is consistent if there isat least one interpretation that satisfies all its formulae.If a belief base K is not consistent, then one can define the minimal inconsistent subsets of K as:MI(K ) =(cid:2)(cid:3) ⊆ KK(cid:3)(cid:3) K(cid:3) (cid:13) ⊥ and ∀K(cid:3)(cid:3) ⊂ K(cid:3), K(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3) ⊥If one wants to recover consistency from an inconsistent base K by removing some formulae, then the minimal incon-sistent subsets can be considered as the purest form of inconsistency. To recover consistency, one has to remove at leastone formula from each minimal inconsistent subset [49]. The notion of maximal consistent subset is the dual of that ofA. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10261009minimal inconsistent subset. Each maximal consistent subset represents a maximal (by set inclusion) subset of the basethat is consistent.(cid:2)MC(K ) =(cid:3) ⊆ KK(cid:3) (cid:3) ⊥ and ∀K(cid:3)(cid:3)s.t. K(cid:3) ⊂ K(cid:3)(cid:3), K(cid:3)(cid:3) K(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:13) ⊥A free formula of a belief base K is a formula of K that does not belong to any minimal inconsistent subset of the beliefbase K , or equivalently a formula that belongs to every maximal consistent subset of the belief base. This means that thisformula has nothing to do with the conflicts of the base.3. Inconsistency measures based on formulaeWhen a base is inconsistent the classical inference relation is trivialized, since one can deduce every formula of the lan-guage from the base (ex falso quodlibet). To address this problem, paraconsistent reasoning techniques have been developedto only allow non-trivial consequences to follow from an inconsistent base. There is a range of paraconsistent systems, eachbased on a weakening of classical reasoning. One approach is a very straightforward weakening that only allows inferencesfrom consistent subsets of a base rather than from the whole base (e.g. [43,4,45]).Paraconsistent reasoning systems provide a natural starting point for analysing inconsistency. One interesting option isto analyse inconsistency in terms of the maximal consistent subsets of the base. So one can use for instance the size (or thenumber) of those maximal consistent subsets as a measure of the inconsistency. Indeed analysis of the maximal consistentsubsets of a base is the basis of the measure of inconsistency proposed by Knight [35,36] which we review next.Definition 1. A probability function on L is a function P : L → [0, 1] s.t.:• if |(cid:5) α, then P (α) = 1.• if |(cid:5) ¬(α ∧ β), then P (α ∨ β) = P (α) + P (β).See [46] for more details on this definition. In the finite case, this definition gives a probability distribution on theinterpretations, and the probability of a formula is the sum of the probability of its models.Then the inconsistency measure defined by Knight [35] is given by:Definition 2. Let K be a belief base.• K is η-consistent (0 (cid:2) η (cid:2) 1) if there is a probability function P such that P (α) (cid:3) η for all α ∈ K .• K is maximally η-consistent if η is maximal (i.e. if γ > η then K is not γ -consistent).As is easily seen, in the finite case, a belief base is maximally 0-consistent if and only if it contains a contradictoryformula. And a belief base is maximally 1-consistent if and only if it is consistent.The notion of maximal η-consistency can be used as an inconsistency measure. This is the direct formulation of the ideathat the more formulae are needed to produce the inconsistency, the less this inconsistency is problematic. Let us illustratethis on the following “lottery example”:Example 1. There are a number of lottery tickets with one of them being the winning ticket. Suppose w i denotes ticket i willwin, then we have the assumption w 1 ∨ · · · ∨ wn. In addition, for each ticket i, we may pessimistically (or probabilisticallyif the number of tickets is important) assume that it will not win, and this is represented by the assumption ¬w i . So thebase K L is:K L = {¬w 1, . . . , ¬wn, w 1 ∨ · · · ∨ wn}Clearly if there are three or two (or one!) tickets in the lottery, then this base is highly inconsistent. But if there aremillions of tickets there is intuitively (nearly) no conflict in the base. This is expressed by the η-consistency measure, sincethe base K L is maximally (n − 1)/n-consistent.1 So with three tickets the base is maximally 2/3-consistent, and with amillion tickets we are very close to maximally 1-consistent.Example 2. Let K1 = {a, b, ¬a ∨ ¬b}. Since, we can reflect a distribution over models by P (a ∧ b) = 13 , and P (¬a ∨ ¬b) = 2P (¬a ∧ b) = 13 . As a result, K1 is maximally 23 . We get P (a) = 23 , P (b) = 23 -consistent.3 , P (a ∧ ¬b) = 13 , andLet K2 = {a ∧ b, ¬a ∧ ¬b, a ∧ ¬b}. K2 is maximally 13 -consistent, whereas each subbase of cardinality 2 is maximally12 -consistent.1 Unless stated otherwise, we consider in the examples that the set of propositional symbols P of the language is exactly the set of propositional symbolsthat appear in the base K .1010A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026For minimal inconsistent sets of formulae, computing this inconsistency measure is easy:Proposition 1. (See [35].) If K(cid:3) ∈ MI(K ), then K(cid:3)is maximally(cid:3)|−1|K|K (cid:3)| -consistent.But in general this measure is harder to compute than the case considered above. However it is possible to compute itusing the simplex method [35].4. Inconsistency measures based on variablesAnother method to evaluate the inconsistency of a belief base is to look at the proportion of the language concernedwith the inconsistency. To this end, it is clearly not possible to use classical logics, since the inconsistency contaminates thewhole language. But if we look at the two bases K 3 = {a ∧ ¬a ∧ b ∧ c ∧ d} and K4 = {a ∧ ¬a ∧ b ∧ ¬b ∧ c ∧ ¬c ∧ d ∧ ¬d}, wecan observe that in K3 the inconsistency is mainly about the variable a, whereas in K 4 all the variables are touched by acontradiction. This is the kind of distinction that these approaches allow.One way to circumscribe the inconsistency only to the variables directly concerned is to use multi-valued logics, andespecially three-valued logics, with the third “truth value” denoting the fact that there is a conflict on the truth value(true–false) of the variable.We do not have space here to detail the range of different measures that have been proposed. See [22,27,32,24,18] formore details on these approaches. We only give one such measure, that is a special case of the degrees of contradictiondefined in [32]. The idea of the definition of these degrees in [32] is, given a set of tests on the truth value of someformulae of the language (typically on the variables), the degree of contradiction is the cost of a minimum test plan thatensures recovery of consistency.The inconsistency measure we define here is the (normalized) minimum number of inconsistent truth values in the LPmmodels [48] of the belief base. Let us first introduce the LPm consequence relation.• An interpretation ω for LPm maps each propositional atom to one of the three “truth values” F, B, T, the third truthis the set of all interpretations for LPm. “Truth values” are orderedvalue B meaning intuitively “both true and false”. 3as follows: F <t B <t T. The interpretations are extended to formulae as follows:P– ω((cid:18)) = T, ω(⊥) = F– ω(¬α) = B– ω(¬α) = Tiff ω(α) = Biff ω(α) = F– ω(α ∧ β) = min(cid:2)t (ω(α), ω(β))– ω(α ∨ β) = max(cid:2)t (ω(α), ω(β))• The set of models of a formula ϕ is:(cid:2)ModLP(ϕ) =(cid:3)(cid:3) ω(ϕ) ∈ {T, B}Define ω! as the set of “inconsistent” variables in an interpretation ω, i.e.ω ∈ 3(cid:4)P(cid:2)x ∈ P(cid:3)(cid:3) ω(x) = B(cid:4)ω! =Then the minimal models of a formula are the “most classical” ones (i.e. the models with the largest subset by setinclusion of atoms assigned either T or F):(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:3) (cid:4)ω(cid:3) ∈ ModLP(ϕ) s.t. ω(cid:3)! ⊂ ω!ModLP(ϕ)ω ∈ ModLP(ϕ)min=(cid:2)(cid:5)The LPm consequence relation is then defined by:(cid:5)K |(cid:5)LPm ϕ iff min(cid:6)ModLP(K )⊆ ModLP(ϕ)So ϕ is a consequence of K if all the “most classical” models of K are models of ϕ.Then let us define the LPm measure of inconsistency [32], noted ILPm , as:Definition 3. Let K be a belief base. ILPm (K ) = minω∈ModLP (K ){|ω!|}|P|.So, with ILPm , the measure of inconsistency of a base is basically the number of “inconsistent” variables in the mostclassical models.Example 3. K5 = {a ∧ ¬a, b, ¬b, c}. The “most classical” LP model of K5 is ω with ω(a) = B, ω(b) = B, ω(c) = T. So with 2of the 3 variables being B, this gives ILPm (K5) = 23 .A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10261011In this example one can see the advantage in these kinds of measures compared to measures based on formulae sincethis base is maximally 0-consistent because of the contradictory formula a ∧ ¬a. But there are also non-trivial formulae inthe base, and this base is not totally inconsistent according to ILPm .Conversely, measures based on variables like this one are unable to take into account the distribution of the contradiction= {a ∧ ¬a ∧ b ∧ ¬b ∧ c}. This can be sensible in someamong formulae. In fact the result would be exactly the same with Kapplications, but in some cases this can also be seen as a drawback. In particular when the formulae represent differentpieces of information (that can come from different sources for instance). See [34] for a related discussion.(cid:3)55. Dimensions for measuring inconsistencyFrom the discussion in the previous sections, we can regard the measures of propositional inconsistency (so far) as fallinginto one or other of the following two classes.Formula-centric measures These measures take into account the number of formulae required for inconsistency: Fewerformulae means higher degree of inconsistency. This is exemplified by the notion of η-consistent.Atom-centric measures These measures take into account the proportion of the language affected by inconsistency: Morepropositional variables involved in inconsistency means higher degree of inconsistency. This is exemplified by theILPm measure of inconsistency.We can also note that the measures defined in the previous sections provide a measure of inconsistency for the wholebase. But we can consider another type of measure, and this leads us to the following two classes of measures.Inconsistency measures (Base-level measures) These measures provide a measure of inconsistency to the beliefbase as awhole. They do not assign a measure of inconsistency to individual formulae.Inconsistency values (Formula-level measures) These values provide a measure of inconsistency to the formulae in a be-liefbase, and in a sense assign the degree of blame or responsibility that can be ascribed to the formulae for theinconsistencies arising in the beliefbase.The measures reviewed up to now are all inconsistency measures (base-level measures). The aim of this paper is topresent and investigate inconsistency values (formula-level measures), and to show that they can be very useful for a lot ofreasoning applications such as belief revision, inference, negotiation, etc.In order to explore the notion of an inconsistency value, we first consider a simple option for such a value.Definition 4. For an inconsistency measure on beliefbases, I : ℘ (L) (cid:19)→ [0, 1], a base K ⊆ L and α ∈ K , the simple assignmentto formulae, M KI: L (cid:19)→ [0, 1], is as follows,M KI (α) = I(K ) − IK \ {α}(cid:5)(cid:6)Let us see an example when we take as inconsistency measure the simplest possible option:Definition 5. The drastic inconsistency value is defined as:(cid:7)Id(K ) =0 if K is consistent1 otherwiseExample 4. For this example, let us use the drastic inconsistency value Id, and consider K6 = {a, a ∧ b, ¬a}. Hence, we getthe following.M KId(a) = 0,M KId(a ∧ b) = 0,M KId(¬a) = 1In this example, we see that all the blame is assigned to the formula that is in both minimal inconsistent subsets, andnone is assigned to either of the formulae which appear in only one of the minimal inconsistent subsets. This is clearly asignificant shortcoming with the simple assignment since at least some of the blame should be assigned to a and to a ∧ b,and hence they should each have a non-zero evaluation.We see in the following example that by taking a more refined inconsistency measure on beliefbases, we get a betterassignment to formulae.Definition 6. The MI inconsistency measure is defined as the number of minimal inconsistent sets of K , i.e.:IMI(K ) =(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)MI(K )1012A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026Example 5. K6 = {a, a ∧ b, ¬a}. Hence, we get the following.M KIMI(a) = 1,M KIMI(a ∧ b) = 1,M KIMI(¬a) = 2However, even with this more refined inconsistency measure on beliefbases, we still can find problematical examples,such as the “lottery example” (Example 1). Let us see what this example gives here:Example 6. For this example, let IMI(K ) = |MI(K )| and letK L = {¬w 1, . . . , ¬wn, w 1 ∨ · · · ∨ wn}(α) = 1.Hence, for each α ∈ K L , we get M KIMIThe problem with the above example is that as n increases, we expect the assignment to each individual formula shoulddecrease. Moreover, we want the distribution to individual formulae to be undertaken according to some well-understoodprinciples. In other words, we do not want an “ad hoc” distribution. To address this need, we turn to game theory in thenext section to provide a well-behaved and principled solution.6. Games in coalitional form – Shapley valueIn this section we give the definitions of games in coalitional form and of the Shapley value.Definition 7. Let N = {1, . . . , n} be a set of n players. A game in coalitional form is given by a function v : 2N → R, withv(∅) = 0.This framework defines games in a very abstract way, focusing on the possible coalition formations. A coalition is justa subset of N. This function gives what payoff can be achieved by each coalition in the game v when all its members acttogether as a unit.There are numerous questions that are worthwhile to investigate in this framework. One of these questions is to knowhow much each player can expect in a given game v. This depends on her position in the game, i.e. what she brings todifferent coalitions.Often the games are super-additive.Definition 8. A game is super-additive if for each T , U ⊆ N with T ∩ U = ∅,v(T ∪ U ) (cid:3) v(T ) + v(U )In super-additive games when two coalitions join, then the joined coalition wins at least as much as (the sum of) theinitials coalitions. In particular, in super-additive games, the grand coalition N is the one that brings the higher utility forthe society N. The problem is how this utility can be shared among the players.2Example 7. Let N = {1, 2, 3}, and let v be the following coalitional game:(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5){1}v(cid:5){1, 2}v= 1= 10(cid:5)v{2}v(cid:5){1, 3}v{1, 2, 3}= 0= 4= 12(cid:5)v(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5){3}v{2, 3}= 1= 11This game is clearly super-additive. The grand coalition can bring 12 to the three players. This is the highest utilityachievable by the group. But this is not the main aim for all the players. In particular one can note that two coalitions canbring nearly as much, namely {1, 2} and {2, 3} that gives respectively 10 and 11, that will have to be shared only between2 players. So it is far from certain that the grand coalition will form in this case. Another remark on this game is that allthe players do not share the same situation. In particular player 2 is always of a great value for any coalition she joins. Soshe seems to be able to expect more from this game than the other players. For example she can make an offer to player 3for making the coalition {2, 3}, that brings 11, that will be split into 8 for player 2 and 3 for player 3. As it will be hard forplayer 3 to win more than that, she will certainly accept.A solution concept has to take into account these kinds of arguments. It means that one wants to solve this game bystating what is the payoff that is “due” to each agent. That requires being able to quantify the payoff that an agent can2 One supposes the transferable utility (TU) assumption, i.e. the utility is a common unit between the players and sharable as needed (roughly, one cansee this utility as some kind of money).A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10261013claim with respect to the power that her position in the game offers (for example if she always significantly improves thepayoff of the coalitions she joins, if she can threaten to form another coalition, etc.).Definition 9. A value is a function that assigns to each game v a vector S(v) in Rn. S i(v) stands for player i’s payoff in thegame.This function gives the payoff that can be expected by each player i for the game v, i.e. it measures i’s power in thegame v.Shapley proposes a beautiful solution to this problem [50]. Basically the idea can be explained as follows: consideringthat the coalitions form according to some order (a first player enters the coalition, then another one, then a third one,etc.), and that the payoff attached to a player is its marginal utility (i.e. the utility that it brings to the existing coalition),so if C is a coalition (subset of N) not containing i, player’s i marginal utility is v(C ∪ {i}) − v(C). As one cannot makeany hypothesis on which order is the correct one, suppose that each order is equally probable. This leads to the followingdefinition of the Shapley value of a game. For this definition, let σ be a permutation on N, with σn denoting all the possiblepermutations on N. Let us note(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3) σ ( j) < σ (i)j ∈ N=(cid:2)piσThat means that piσ represents all the players that precede player i for a given order σ .Definition 10. The Shapley value of a game v is defined as:S i(v) = 1n!(cid:8)(cid:5)vσ ∈σnpiσ∪ {i}(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5)piσ− vThe Shapley value can be directly computed from the possible coalitions (without looking at the permutations), with thefollowing expression [50]:S i(v) =(cid:8)C⊆N(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!(cid:5)v(C) − v(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5)C \ {i}where c is the cardinality of C .Example 8. The Shapley value of the game defined in Example 7 is ( 176 , 356 , 206 ).These values show that it is player 2 that is the best placed in this game, according to what we explained when wepresented Example 7.Besides this value, Shapley proposes axiomatic properties a value should have.(cid:9)i∈N S i(v) = v(N)•• If i and j are such that for all C s.t. i, j /∈ C , v(C ∪ {i}) = v(C ∪ { j}), then S i(v) = S j(v)• If i is such that ∀C v(C ∪ {i}) = v(C), then S i(v) = 0• S i(v + w) = S i(v) + S i(w)(Efficiency)(Symmetry)(Dummy)(Additivity)These four axioms seem quite sensible. Efficiency states that the payoff available to the grand coalition N must beefficiently redistributed to the players (otherwise some players could expect more than what they have). Symmetry ensuresthat it is the role of the player in the game in coalitional form that determines her payoff, so it is not possible to distinguishplayers by their name (as far as payoffs are concerned), but only by their respective merits/possibilities. So if two playersalways are identical for the game, i.e. if they bring the same utility to every coalition, then they have the same value. Thedummy player axiom says simply that if a player is of no use for any coalition, this player does not deserve any payoff. Andadditivity states that when we join two different games v and w in a whole super-game v + w (v + w is straightforwardlydefined as the function that is the sum of the two functions v and w, that means that each coalition receives as payoff inthe game v + w the payoff it has in v plus the payoff it has in w), then the value of each player in the supergame is simplythe sum of the values in the compound games.These properties look quite natural, and the nice result shown by Shapley is that they characterize exactly the value hedefined [50]:Proposition 2. The Shapley value is the only value that satisfies all of Efficiency, Symmetry, Dummy and Additivity.This result supports several variations: there are other equivalent axiomatizations of the Shapley value, and there aresome different values that can be defined by relaxing some of the above axioms (see [2]).1014A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10267. Inconsistency values using Shapley valueGiven an inconsistency measure, the idea is to take it as the payoff function defining a game in coalitional form, andthen using the Shapley value to compute the part of the inconsistency that can be imputed to each formula of the beliefbase.This allows us to combine the power of inconsistency measures based on variables and hence discriminating betweensingleton inconsistent belief base (like the test action values of [32], or the Inc measure in [18]), and the use of the Shapleyvalue for knowing what is the responsibility of a given formula in the inconsistency of the belief base.We just require some basic properties on the underlying inconsistency measure.Definition 11. An inconsistency measure I∀K , K(cid:3) ∈ KL, ∀α, β ∈ L:is called a basic inconsistency measure if it satisfies the following properties,• I(K ) = 0 iff K is consistent(cid:3)) (cid:3) I(K )• I(K ∪ K• If α is a free formula of K , then I(K ) = I(K \ {α})• If α (cid:13) β and α (cid:3) ⊥, then I(K ∪ {α}) (cid:3) I(K ∪ {β})(Consistency)(Monotony)(Free formula independence)(Dominance)We ask for few properties on the underlying inconsistency measure. The Consistency property states that a consistentbase has a null inconsistency measure. The Monotony property says that the amount of inconsistency of a belief base canonly grow if one adds new formulae (defined on the same language). The free formula independence property states thatadding a formula that does not cause any inconsistency cannot change the inconsistency measure of the base. The Domi-nance property states that logically stronger formulae bring (potentially) more conflicts. Note, for the Dominance property,the condition that α is consistent ensures that β is not trivially implied by α and therefore not trivially adding moreinconsistency to (cid:10) than α.We could also ask for the following Normalization property of the inconsistency measure, as it can be used for simplifi-cation purposes. However, we do not regard it as mandatory.• 0 (cid:2) I(K ) (cid:2) 1(Normalization)Now we are able to define the Shapley Inconsistency Value.Definition 12. Let I be a basic inconsistency measure. We define the corresponding Shapley Inconsistency Value (SIV),noted S I , as the Shapley value of the coalitional game defined by the function I , i.e. let α ∈ K :(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5)α(K ) =S IC⊆K(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!I(C) − IC \ {α}where n is the cardinality of K and c is the cardinality of C .Note that this SIV gives a value for each formula of the base K , so if one considers the base K as the vector K =(α1, . . . , αn), then we will use S I (K ) to denote the vector of corresponding SIVs, i.e.(cid:5)S I (K ) =S Iα1(K ), . . . , S Iαn(cid:6)(K )This definition allows us to define to what extent a formula inside a belief base is concerned with the inconsistencies ofthe base. It allows us to draw a precise picture of the contradictions occurring in the base.From this value, one can define an inconsistency value for the whole belief base as in the next definition which essen-tially says that a base is as bad as its worst element.Definition 13. Let K be a belief base, ˆS I (K ) = maxα∈K S Iα(K ).One can identify other aggregation functions to define the inconsistency measure of the belief base from the inconsis-tency measure of its formulae, such as the leximax for instance. Leximax is a refinement of max, and roughly it consistsin ordering the set of values in a decreasing order, and to compare the ordered lists lexicographically. See [33] for instancefor a formal definition. Taking the maximum will be sufficient for us to have valuable results and to compare this with theexisting measures from the literature. Note that taking the sum as the aggregation function is not a good choice here, sinceas shown by the Distribution property of Proposition 6 this equals I(K ), “erasing” the use of the Shapley value.We think that the most interesting measure is S I , since it describes more accurately the inconsistency of the base. Butwe define ˆS I since it is a more concise measure, and since it is of the same type as existing ones (it associates a real toeach base), that is convenient to compare our framework with existing measures.A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10261015Let us now see three instantiations of SIVs.7.1. Drastic Shapley Inconsistency ValueWe will start this section with the simplest inconsistency measure one can define, that is the drastic inconsistency valueof Definition 5:(cid:7)Id(K ) =0 if K is consistent1 otherwiseThis measure is not of great interest by itself, since it corresponds to the usual dichotomy of classical logic. But it will beuseful to illustrate the use of the Shapley Inconsistency Values, since, even with this over-simple measure, one will produceinteresting results.Proposition 3. The drastic inconsistency value is a basic inconsistency measure.Let us now illustrate the behaviour of this value on some examples.Example 9. K7 = {a, ¬a, b}. As b is a free formula, it has a value of 0, the two other formulae are equally responsible forthe inconsistency. Then Id({a, ¬a}) = Id({a, ¬a, b}) = 1, and the value is S Id (K7) = ( 12 , 0). So ˆS Id (K7) = 12 .2 , 1Example 10. K8 = {a, b, b ∧ c, ¬b ∧ d}. The last three formulae are the ones that belong to some inconsistency, and the lastone is the one that causes the most problems (indeed removing only this formula restores the consistency of the base). Asa result, the value is S Id (K8) = (0, 16 ). And ˆS Id (K8) = 23 .6 , 46 , 1Example 11. K5 = {a ∧ ¬a, b, ¬b, c}. The value is S Id (K5) = ( 46 , 16 , 16 , 0). So ˆS Id (K5) = 23 .Contradictory formulae (like a ∧ ¬a) are the most problematical ones, but they are not the only source of conflict in thebase. This is exactly what is expressed in the values obtained in the above example.7.2. MI Shapley Inconsistency ValueWe now consider another syntactic inconsistency measure which, in a sense, is sensitive to the “number of conflicts” inthe base. That is the MI inconsistency measure defined in Definition 6:IMI(K ) =(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)MI(K )So this measure evaluates the amount of conflict of the base as the number of minimal inconsistent subsets of this base,so it computes in a sense the number of different conflict points in the base.It is easy to check that:Proposition 4. The MI inconsistency measure is a basic inconsistency measure.Let us illustrate the behaviour of this value on some examples.Example 12. K7 = {a, ¬a, b}. As b is a free formula, it has a value of 0, the two other formulae are equally responsible forthe inconsistency. Then IMI({a, ¬a}) = IMI({a, ¬a, b}) = 1, and the value is S IMI (K7) = ( 12 , 0). So ˆS IMI (K7) = 12 .2 , 1Example 13. K8 = {a, b, b ∧ c, ¬b ∧ d}. The last three formulae are the ones that belong to some inconsistency, and thelast one is the one that causes the most problems (removing only this formula restores the consistency). Then the value isS IMI (K8) = (0, 12 , 1). So ˆS IMI (K8) = 1.2 , 1Example 14. K5 = {a ∧ ¬a, b, ¬b, c}. The value is S IMI (K5) = (1, 12 , 12 , 0). So ˆS IMI (K5) = 1.Example 15. K9 = {a ∧ ¬a, b, ¬b ∧ c, ¬b ∧ d}. The value is S IMI (K9) = (1, 1, 12 , 12 ). So ˆS IMI (K9) = 1.The last two examples above show that this measure is very sensitive to contradictory formulae, since as soon as thebase contains a contradictory formula, the inconsistency measure of the base is maximum.1016A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026Example 16. K10 = {a, ¬a ∧ b, ¬a ∧ c, ¬a ∧ d}. The value is S IMI (K10) = ( 32 , 12 , 12 , 12 ). So ˆS IMI (K10) = 32 .Example 17. K11 = {a, ¬a ∧ b, ¬a ∨ c, ¬c}. The value is S IMI (K11) = ( 56 , 12 , 13 , 13 ). So ˆS IMI (K11) = 56 .7.3. LPm Shapley Inconsistency ValueLet us turn now to a value that use the ILPm inconsistency measure (defined Section 4).Unfortunately the ILPm inconsistency measure is not a basic inconsistency measure, since it does not satisfy the freeformula independence property. Let us show this on an example.Example 18. Consider K16 = {((a ∧ ¬b) ∨ (b ∧ a ∧ ¬a)) ∧ c ∧ ¬c} and α = b. α is a free formula of K16 ∪ {α} since theunique formula of K16 is already a contradiction, but it increases the inconsistency value since ILPm (K16) = 13 , whereasILPm (K16 ∪ {α}) = 23 .To not satisfy free formula independence is problematic since this property expresses a kind of independence betweenthe amount of information and the amount of contradiction of a base. The aim is to ensure that adding new formulas thatdo not enter into any contradiction/conflict do not change the inconsistency measure.On the other hand, one argument against free formula independence is that it considers the contradiction/conflict onlyat the level of the subsets (since being a free formula means that it does not introduce any new minimal inconsistentsubset). What the previous example shows is that a formula that does not induce any minimal inconsistent subset can stillincrease the conflicts in existing minimal inconsistent subsets.So, in some cases, this property can be considered as too strong. To address this, we can define a weaker family ofinconsistency measures.Definition 14. For α ∈ K , α is a safe formula in K iff Atoms(α) ∩ Atoms(K ) = ∅ and α (cid:3) ⊥.Using this definition, we can introduce the following property of safe formula independence (also called weak indepen-dence by Thimm [52]).• If α is a safe formula of K , then I(K ) = I(K \ {α})(Safe formula independence)Obviously safe formula independence is a (logically) weaker notion than free formula independence. The idea is similar,meaning that if we add new pieces of information that have no relation with the existing conflicts of the base, then theinconsistency measure does not change.Definition 15. An inconsistency measure Idominance, and safe formula independence.is called a weak inconsistency measure if it satisfies consistency, monotony,So now we can show that:Proposition 5. The ILPm inconsistency measure is a weak inconsistency measure.Now let us see the behaviour of this value on some examples.Example 19. Let K5 = {a ∧ ¬a, b, ¬b, c} and K6 , 0), and ˆS ILPm (K5) = 16 , 13 , 13 .3 ) and ˆS ILPm (K(cid:3)5) = ( 2Then S ILPm (K5) = ( 1Whereas S ILPm (K(cid:3)5) = 23 .(cid:3)5= {a ∧ ¬a ∧ b ∧ ¬b ∧ c}.As we can see on this example, the SIV value allows us to make a distinction between K 5 and K(cid:3)5) = 23whereas ˆS ILPm (K5) = 1(cid:3)5. This distinctionis not possible with the original ILPm value. Note that with Knight’s coherence value one cannot distinguish the two baseseither, since the two bases have the worst inconsistency value (maximally 0-consistent).3 . This illustrates the fact that the inconsistency is more distributed in K 5 than in K5, since ˆS ILPm (K(cid:3)So this example illustrates the improvement brought by this work, compared to inconsistency measures on formulae and(cid:3)5, whereasto inconsistency measures on variables, since neither of them was able to make a distinction between K 5 and Kfor ˆS ILPm K5 is more consistent than KLet us see a more striking example.(cid:3)5.A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10261017Example 20. Let K12 = {a, b, b ∧ c, ¬b ∧ ¬c}.Then S ILPm (K12) = (0, 118 , 418 , 718 ), and ˆS ILPm (K12) = 718 .In this example one can easily see that it is the last formula that is the most problematic, and that b ∧ c brings moreconflict than b alone, which is perfectly expressed in the obtained values.8. Logical properties of SIVLet us see now some properties of the defined values.Proposition 6. Assume a given basic inconsistency measure I . Every Shapley Inconsistency Value S I satisfies:(cid:9)α∈K S Iα(K ) = I(K )•• If α, β ∈ K are such that for all K• If α is a free formula of K , then S I• If α (cid:13) β and α (cid:3) ⊥, then S I(cid:3) ⊆ K s.t. α, β /∈ Kα(K ) = 0β (K )α(K ) (cid:3) S I(cid:3), I(K(cid:3) ∪ {α}) = I(K(cid:3) ∪ {β}), then S Iα(K ) = S Iβ (K )(Distribution)(Symmetry)(Minimality)(Dominance)The Distribution property states that the inconsistency values of the formulae sum to the total amount of inconsistencyin the base (I(K )). The Symmetry property ensures that only the amount of inconsistency brought by a formula mattersfor computing the SIV. As one would expect, a formula that is not embedded in any contradiction (i.e. does not belong toany minimal inconsistent subset) will not be blamed by the Shapley Inconsistency Values. This is what is expressed in theMinimality property. The Dominance property states that logically stronger formulae bring (potentially) more conflicts.The first three properties are a restatement in this logical framework of the properties of the Shapley value. One cannote that the Additivity axiom of the Shapley value is not translated here, since it makes little sense to add differentinconsistency values that are two different views of the same subject: It is like trying to add the temperature of an objectmeasured in degrees Fahrenheit to the temperature of the same object measured in degrees Celsius. We will elaborate moreon this point in the next section.Let us turn now to the properties of the measure on belief bases.Proposition 7.• ˆS I (K ) = 0 if and only if K is consistent• If α is a free formula of K ∪ {α}, then ˆS I (K ∪ {α}) = ˆS I (K )• ˆS I (K ) (cid:2) I(K )• ˆS I (K ) = I(K ) > 0 if and only if ∃α ∈ K s.t. α is inconsistent and ∀β ∈ K , β (cid:21)= α, β is a free formula of K(Consistency)(Free formula independence)(Upper bound)(Isolation)The first two properties are the ones given in Definition 11 for the basic inconsistency measures. As one can easily notean important difference is that the Monotony property and the Dominance property do not hold for the SIVs on belief bases.It is sensible since distribution of the inconsistencies matters for SIVs. The Upper bound property shows that the use of theSIV aims at looking at the distribution of the inconsistencies of the base, so the SIV on belief bases is always less or equalto the inconsistency measure given by the underlying basic inconsistency measure. The Isolation property details the casewhere the two measures are equals. In this case, there is only one inconsistent formula in the whole base, and all the otherformulas are jointly consistent.Let us see, on Example 21, counter-examples to monotony and dominance for SIV on belief bases:Example 21. LetK13 = {a, ¬a, ¬a ∧ b}K14 = {a, ¬a, ¬a ∧ b, a ∧ b}andK15 = {a, ¬a, ¬a ∧ b, b}We then obtain:(cid:10)S Id (K13) =(cid:11),23,16,16S Id (K14) =(cid:10)14,14,14,14(cid:11),and S Id (K15) =(cid:10)(cid:11)23,16,16, 01018So:A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026ˆS Id (K13) = 23,ˆS Id (K14) = 14,ˆS Id (K15) = 23This example shows that monotony is not satisfied by SIV on belief bases. Clearly K 13 ⊂ K14, but ˆS Id (K13) > ˆS Id (K14).This is explained by the fact that the inconsistency is more diluted in K 14 than in K13. In K13 the formula a is the one thatis the most blamed for the inconsistency (S3 ), since it appears in all inconsistent sets. Whereas in K 14inconsistencies are equally caused by a and by a ∧ b, that decreases the responsibility of a, and the whole inconsistencyvalue of the base.a (K13) = ˆS Id (K13) = 2IdFor a similar reason dominance is not satisfied, we clearly have a ∧ b (cid:13) b (and a ∧ b (cid:3) ⊥), but ˆS Id (K14) < ˆS Id (K15).9. Logical characterization of S IMIIn this section we give a complete characterization of the Shapley Inconsistency Value based on the MI inconsistencymeasure (S IMI ).We first show that this measure can be alternatively defined from a function based on minimal inconsistent sets, beforestating additional logical properties of this measure, and finally stating the logical characterization.9.1. S IMI as a minimal inconsistent set valueAs minimal inconsistent sets are the places in the bases where the inconsistencies lie in, they can be a good startingpoint to define inconsistency values.Consider the following inconsistency value (for more details on measures based on minimal inconsistent sets see [25]).Definition 16. MIV C is defined as follows:MIV C (K , α) =(cid:8)M∈MI(K ) s.t. α∈M1|M|Basically for each formula belonging to a minimal inconsistent set M the formula receives a penalty (i.e. blame or|M| ). So the value associated to a formula is the sum of all these localresponsibility) inversely proportional to its size ( 1penalties.And in fact this method that computes the value of each formula by looking successively (and uniquely) to all minimalinconsistent subsets is an alternative definition of the SIV S IMI .Proposition 8. S IMIα (K ) = MIV C (K , α).This result is interesting since computing Shapley values is a computationally difficult task. And this alternative definitioncan give us an efficient practical way to compute the result of S IMI . Based on SAT solvers, different works have studied theproblem of identifying minimal inconsistent subsets (called in these works Minimally Unsatisfiable Subformulas or MUS).Although the identification problem is computationally hard, since checking whether a set of clauses is a MUS or not isDP-complete, and checking whether a formula belongs to the set of MUSes of a base, is in Σ P2 [16]; it seems that findingeach MUS can be practically feasible [20,21].The other interest of this result is that it is useful to state the logical characterization of S IMI .9.2. Logical properties of IMIFirst let us remark that the IMI basic inconsistency measure satisfies two additional properties:Proposition 9. IMI satisfies:• If MI(K ∪ K• If M ∈ MI(K ), then I(M) = 1(cid:3)) = MI(K ) ⊕ MI(K(cid:3)), then I(K ∪ K(cid:3)) = I(K ) + I(K(cid:3))(MinInc separability)(MinInc)The first property basically expresses the fact that the inconsistency measure depends only on the minimal inconsistentsubsets, so that if we can partition the belief base in two subbases without “breaking” any minimal inconsistent subset,then the global inconsistency measure is the sum of the inconsistency measure of the two subbases.The second property really depicts the MI inconsistency measure behaviour, expressing the fact that all minimal incon-sistent subset are considered equally.A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–102610199.3. On the Additivity axiomWe wrote in Section 8 that a direct translation of the Additivity axiom of Shapley’s characterization has little meaningfor inconsistency values. Let us recall this axiom. Let v and w be two coalitional games:• S i(v + w) = S i(v) + S i(w)(Additivity)As in this work we use basic inconsistency measures instead of coalitional games, a direct translation of this propertywould give (let I and J be two basic inconsistency measures):• SI+ Jα (K ) = S Iα(K ) + SJα(K )(Add1)But first, it is strange to add different measures of inconsistency that give different evaluation of the same situation, soJα(K ) has little meaning. But also it is hard to find a definition of what could be the added measurethe addition S I“I + J ”. So this translation seems to lead nowhere.α(K ) + SStill, we can express another kind of additivity property:• S Iα(K ∪ K(cid:3)) = S Iα(K ) + S Iα(K(cid:3))(Add2)So this translation considers the “addition” of two different bases (the set union). But this formulation is not satisfactorybecause it forgets the fact that new conflicts can appear when making the union of the two bases.So we want this property to hold only when joining two bases does not create any new inconsistencies. This leads tothe following Pre-Decomposability property3:• If MI(K ∪ K(cid:3)) = MI(K ) ⊕ MI(K(cid:3)), then S Iα(K ∪ K(cid:3)) = S Iα(K ) + S Iα(K(cid:3))(Pre-Decomposability)The condition ensures that there will be no new conflicts (minimal inconsistent sets) when the two bases are joined.When this is the case, then we ask this additivity property to hold.This property is useful only when one can split a base into two subbases without breaking minimal inconsistent sets.This is not always possible. So we need a slightly more general property:• If |MI(K1 ∪ · · · ∪ Kn)| = |MI(K1)| + · · · + |MI(Kn)|, then S Iα(K1 ∪ · · · ∪ Kn) = S Iα(K1) + · · · + S Iα(Kn)(Decomposability)The Decomposability property says that if we can split the minimal inconsistent sets into several subbases, then we canapply additivity on these subbases.It is easy to see that the Pre-Decomposability property is implied by the Decomposability property.Note that this possibility of interaction between the subgames that is not taken into account in the usual Additivitycondition, is one of the criticisms about this condition. Let us quote for instance the following paragraph from [40]:The last condition is not nearly so innocent as the other two. For although v + w is a game composed from v and w, wecannot in general expect it to be played as if it were the two separate games. It will have its own structure which willdetermine a set of equilibrium outcomes which may be different from those for v and w. Therefore, one might very wellargue that its a priori value should not necessarily be the sum of the values of the two component games. This strikesus as a flaw in the concept value, but we have no alternative to suggest.In our framework the interaction between the bases is simply the new logical conflicts that appears when joining thebases, that allows us to say when this addition can hold, and when it is not sensible.9.4. Logical characterization of S IMIWe can now state the logical characterization of S IMI .Proposition 10. An inconsistency value satisfies Distribution, Symmetry, Minimality, Decomposability and MinInc if and only if it isthe MI Shapley Inconsistency Value S IMIα .This result means that the Shapley Inconsistency Value S IMIαis completely characterized by five simple and intuitiveaxioms.3 The property of Pre-Decomposability was called Decomposability in [25].1020A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026Note that Dominance, although satisfied by SIV, is not required for stating this proposition.10. Applications of the SIVsAs the measures we define allow us to associate with each formula its degree of responsibility for the inconsistency ofthe base, they can be potentially useful for a lot of different reasoning or deliberative tasks. They can be in particular usedto guide any paraconsistent reasoning, or any repair of the base. Let us quote three such possible uses for inference andbelief change operators. The first example is for paraconsistent inference. The second one is about belief revision and thelast one for negotiation.10.1. Reasoning with inconsistent beliefbasesWe show in this section how we can take an inconsistent beliefbase, and use the measure of inconsistency to prioritizethe formulae in the beliefbase, so that a paraconsistent consequence relation can be used with the belief.There are some, but not many, inference relations from maximal consistent subsets where the base is not stratified. Themain ones are skeptical, credulous and argumentative inference relations. See [4] for a survey. There are more possibilitieswhen the bases are stratified, with some formulas being more important than others [11,3,14]. But these approaches need anadditional kind of information: the stratification. It is not a problem when such information is available from the application.But when the only information is a non-stratified base, i.e. a set of formulas, these approaches are of no use. In order to usethem we need a means to induce a stratification from the flat (non-stratified) base. One approach to induce a stratificationfrom a flat base is based on the specificity principle used for defaults such as in rational closure [38] and in System Z [47].But this process gives a special status to implication, that is considered as a default rule, so it is not syntax independent(a formula a → b will be treated differently than the formula ¬a ∨ b). Another approach is to use a tuple of formulae asinput (as in knowledge merging) where each formula can occur multiple times in the tuple (see for example [13,26]). Forthis, a merged knowledge base is obtained by taking into account the degree of support that each candidate for the mergedknowledge base receives from input formulae. Furthermore, this degree of support gives a preference (or priority) over theformulae in the merged knowledge that can be used to stratify them in the output.However, there does not appear to be proposal for stratifying a set of formulae where the input is a set of formulaeof propositional logic. But Shapley Inconsistency Values can be used to define such a stratification. The idea is simple:take the set of formulae and compute their Shapley Inconsistency Values. This allows us to define a stratification from lessinconsistent formulas to more inconsistent ones. Then this stratification can be used as input for one of the numerous infer-ence relations for stratified bases [11,3,14]. This allows us to extend the usual approaches to reasoning with inconsistencyin a very natural way, and to define a whole set of different inference relations for flat bases by choosing one ShapleyInconsistency Value and one (stratified) inference relation.10.2. Iterated revision and transmutation policiesThe problem of belief revision is to incorporate a new piece of information that is more reliable than (and conflictingwith) the old beliefs of the agent. This problem has received a nice answer in the work of Alchourrón, Gärdenfors andMakinson [1] in the one-step case. But when one wants to iterate revision, there are numerous problems and no definitiveanswer has been reached in the purely qualitative case [15,17]. Using a partially quantitative framework, some proposalshave given interesting results (see e.g. [54,51]). Here “partially quantitative” means that the incoming piece of informationneeds to be labeled by a degree of confidence denoting how strongly we believe it. The problem in this framework is tojustify the use of such a degree, what does it mean exactly and where does it come from. One possibility is to use aninconsistency measure (or a composite measure computed from an information measure [39,36,32] and an inconsistencymeasure) to determine this degree of confidence. We can then use the partially quantitative framework to derive revisionoperators with a nice behaviour (w.r.t. [15,5,30]). In this setting, since the degree attached to the incoming informationis not a given data, but computed directly from the information itself and the agent policy (behaviour with respect toinformation and contradiction, encoded by a composite measure) then the problem of the justification of the meaning ofthe degrees is avoided.Another possible use of the inconsistency measures for belief revision is that they allow to define non-prioritized beliefrevision operators [23]. One can define several revision policies for the agent. We can for instance decide that an agentaccepts a new piece of information only if it brings a lot of information and few contradictions, etc.10.3. NegotiationThe problem of negotiation has been investigated recently under the scope of belief change tools [6–8,55,41,37,19]. Theproblem is to define operators that take as input belief profiles (vectors of formulae4) and that produce a new belief profile4 More exactly belief profiles are vectors of belief bases. We use this simplifying assumption just for avoiding technical details here.A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10261021that aims to be less conflicting. We call these kind of operators conciliation operators. The idea followed in [7,8,37] to defineconciliation operators is to use an iterative process where at each step a set of formulae is selected. These selected formulaeare logically weakened. The process stops when one reaches a consensus, i.e. a consistent belief profile.5 Many interestingoperators can be defined when one fixes the selection function (the function that selects the formulae that must be weakenat each round) and the weakening method. In [37] the selection function is based on a notion of distance. It can be sensibleif such a distance is meaningful in a particular application. If not, it is only an arbitrary choice. It would then be sensibleto choose instead one of the inconsistency measures we defined in this paper. So the selection function would choose theformulae with the highest inconsistency value. These formulae are clearly the more problematic ones. More generally SIVscan be used to define new belief merging methods, and guide other negotiation-like operators.11. ConclusionWe have proposed in this paper a new framework for defining inconsistency values. The SIV values we introduce allowus to take into account the distribution of the inconsistency among the formulae of the belief base and the variables of thelanguage. This is, as far as we know, the only definition that allows us to take both types of information into account, thusallowing to have a more precise picture of the inconsistency of a belief base. The perspectives of this work are numerous.First, as sketched in the previous section, the use of inconsistency measures, and especially the use of Shapley InconsistencyValues, can be valuable for several belief change operators, for instance for modeling of negotiation. The Shapley value isnot the only solution concept for coalitional games, so an interesting question is to know if other solution concepts (for areview of other values see [44]) can be sensible as a basis for defining other inconsistency measures. But the main way ofresearch opened by this work is to study more closely the connections between other notions of (cooperative) game theoryand the logical modeling of belief change operators.12. ProofsProof of Proposition 3. Clearly consistency is satisfied by definition.(cid:3)K ∪ KTo show monotony is direct. If K ∪ Kis not consistent, so Id(K ∪ K(cid:3)is consistent, then K alone is also consistent, so Id(K ∪ K(cid:3)) = 1 by definition, so Id(K ∪ K(cid:3)) (cid:3) Id(K ). So in either case Id(K ∪ K(cid:3)) = Id(K ) = 0, otherwise(cid:3)) (cid:3) Id(K ).To show free formula independence proceed by cases: If K is consistent, then Id(K ) = Id(K \ {α}) = 0 by definition,otherwise K is not consistent, but as by hypothesis α is a free formula of K , this implies that K \ {α} is not consistent. ThenId(K ) = Id(K \ {α}) = 1 by definition. So in either case Id(K ) = Id(K \ {α}).To show dominance, first if K ∪ {β} is consistent, then Id(K ∪ {β}) = 0, so Id(K ∪ {α}) (cid:3) Id(K ∪ {β}). Now, if K ∪ {β}is not consistent. By hypothesis α (cid:13) β, this implies that Cn(K ∪ {β}) ⊆ Cn(K ∪ {α}). So K ∪ {α} is not consistent too. ThenId(K ∪ {α}) = Id(K ∪ {β}) = 1. So also in this case we have Id(K ∪ {α}) (cid:3) Id(K ∪ {β}). (cid:2)Proof of Proposition 4. To show consistency, note that K is consistent if and only if MI(K ) = ∅. So K is consistent if andonly if IMI(K ) = |MI(K )| = 0.To show monotony, note that if M ∈ MI(K ), then for any K, M ∈ MI(K ∪ K(cid:3)(cid:3)). So |MI(K )| (cid:2) |MI(K ∪ K(cid:3))|. That meansIMI(K ) (cid:2) IMI(K ∪ K(cid:3)).For free formula independence, if α is a free formula of K , this means that α does not belong to any minimal inconsis-tent set of K . So MI(K ) = MI(K \ {α}). So IMI(K ) = IMI(K \ {α}).For dominance, as α (cid:13) β, then for any M ∈ MI(K ∪ {β}), either β /∈ M or β ∈ M. If β /∈ M, then M ∈ MI(K ), and soM ∈ MI(K ∪ {α}). Otherwise β ∈ M, and so M \ {β} ∪ {α} ∈ MI(K ∪ {α}). So this means that |MI(K ∪ {α})| (cid:3) |MI(K ∪ {β})|, orequivalently IMI(K ∪ {α}) (cid:3) IMI(K ∪ {β}). (cid:2)Proof of Proposition 5. For consistency note that if K is consistent, then K has at least one (classical) model. This model isalso a LPm model of K . So minω∈ModLP(K ){|ω!|} = 0 since this classical model does not map any variable to the inconsistenttruth value. So ILPm (K ) = 0. If K is not consistent, then K has no classical model. So any LPm model of K maps at least onevariable to the inconsistent truth value, so minω∈ModLP(K ){|ω!|} (cid:3) 1, so ILPm (K ) (cid:21)= 0.For monotony, note that by definition of LPm models ModLP(K ∪ K(cid:3)) (cid:3) ILPm (K ).this meansthat ModLP(K ∪ {α}) ⊆ ModLP(K ∪ {β}). So minω∈ModLP(K ∪{α}){|ω!|} (cid:3)minω∈ModLP(K ){|ω!|}. So ILPm (K ∪ Kif α (cid:13) β,(cid:3)) ⊆ ModLP(K ). So minω∈ModLP(K ∪K (cid:3)){|ω!|} (cid:3)For dominance,minω∈ModLP(K ∪{β}){|ω!|}, and ILPm (K ∪ {α}) (cid:3) ILPm (K ∪ {β}).For safe formula independence, for each model, w ∈ ModLP(K \ {α}) such that |w!| is minimal, there is a model w(cid:3) ∈agree on the atoms occurring in K \ {α} and for the atoms not occurring in K \ {α} (i.e. those(cid:3)!|.agree on(cid:3)!| is minimal, there is a model w ∈ Mod(K ) such w and wdoes not assign B to these atoms by), and hence, |w!| = |w(cid:3)(cid:3) ∈ Mod(K ) such that |wModLP(K ) such w and woccurring in α), the assignment by wFurthermore, for each wis in {T, F} (i.e. w(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)5 A belief profile is consistent if the conjunction of its formulae is consistent.1022A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026the atoms occurring in K \ {α} and for the atoms not occurring in K \ {α}, the assignment by w|w!| = |w(cid:3)!|. Therefore, if α is a safe formula in K , then ILPm (K ) = ILPm (K \ {α}). (cid:2)(cid:3)is in {T, F}, and hence,Proof of Proposition 6. To show distribution, let us recall that(cid:8)α(K ) =S I(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!(cid:5)I(C) − I(cid:5)C \ {α}(cid:6)(cid:6)C⊆K(cid:8)= 1n!σ ∈σn(cid:5)Ipασ∪ {α}(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5)pασ− Iwhere σn is the set of possible permutations on ¯K , and pασ(cid:8)(cid:8)(cid:8)α(K ) =S Iα∈K1n!(cid:8)σ ∈σn(cid:8)II(cid:5)σ ∈σnα∈Kα∈K= 1n!(cid:5)pασ(cid:6)∪ {α}− I(cid:5)(cid:6)pασpασ∪ {α}(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5)pασ− I= {β ∈ K | σ (β) < σ (α)}. NowNow note that we can order the elements of K accordingly to σ when computing the inside sum, and this gives:(cid:6)(cid:5)− I{ασ (1), . . . , ασ (n)}(cid:6){ασ (1), . . . , ασ (n−1)}(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:5)− I{ασ (1), . . . , ασ (n−2)}(cid:6)(cid:13){ασ (1), . . . , ασ (n−1)}(cid:13){ασ (1)}− I(∅)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:12)I{ασ (1), . . . , ασ (n)}(cid:6)− I(∅)= 1n!+(cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:5)Iσ ∈σn(cid:5)(cid:12)I+ · · · +(cid:8)I(cid:5)= 1n!σ ∈σnn! n! I(K )= 1= I(K )To show symmetry, assume that there are α, β ∈ K s.t. for all KNow by definition(cid:3) ⊆ K s.t. α, β /∈ K(cid:3), I(K(cid:3) ∪ {α}) = I(K(cid:3) ∪ {β}).α(K ) =S I(cid:8)C⊆K(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!(cid:5)I(C) − I(cid:5)C \ {α}(cid:6)(cid:6)Let us show that S Iα(K ) = S Iβ (K ) by showing (by cases) that the elements of the sum are the same:• If α /∈ C and β /∈ C , then I(C) = I(C \ {α}) = I(C \ {β}), so I(C) − I(C \ {α}) = I(C) − I(C \ {β}).• If α ∈ C and β ∈ C , then note that by hypothesis, as α, β /∈ C \ {α, β}, we deduce that I(C \ {α}) = I(C \ {β}). SoI(C) − I(C \ {α}) = I(C) − I(C \ {β}).• If α ∈ C and β /∈ C . Then I(C) − I(C \ {β}) = 0, and let us denote I(C) − I(C \ {α}) = a. Let us denote C = C(cid:3)(cid:3) = C(cid:3)(cid:3) \ {α}) = 0. We can deduce I(C(cid:3) ∪ {β}. Now notice that C(cid:3)(cid:3) \ {α} so I(C(cid:3)(cid:3)) − I(C(cid:3)(cid:3)). Also we can deduce I(C \ {α}) = I(C(cid:3) ∩ {α} = ∅, and CCI(CTherefore, we also have I(C(cid:3)(cid:3) = C(cid:3) ∪ {β}) by the hypothesis, and hence I(C) = I(C(cid:3)(cid:3)) − I(C(cid:3)(cid:3) \ {β}) = a.(cid:3) ∪ {α} with(cid:3) ∪ {α}) =(cid:3)(cid:3) \ {β}) by the hypothesis.So using this bijection, we have that for all C ⊆ K , I(C)− I(C \{α}) = I(F (C))− I(F (C)\{β}). Hence,(cid:9)Hence there is a bijection F : ℘ (K ) (cid:19)→ ℘ (K ) such that if α ∈ C and β /∈ C , then F (C) = C \ {α} ∪ {β} otherwise F (C) = C .C⊆K I(C)− I(C \{α}) =C⊆K I(F (C)) − I(F (C) \ {β}).C⊆K I(F (C)) − I(F (C) \ {β}). Also, since F is a bijection on ℘ (K ),(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Therefore,C⊆K I(C) − I(C \ {α}) =C⊆K I(C) − I(C \ {β}). Hence, S IC⊆K I(C) − I(C \ {β}) =α(K ) = S Iβ (K ).To show the minimality property, just note that if α is a free formula of K , then by the free formula independenceproperty of the basic inconsistency measure we have that for every C ⊆ K , such that α ∈ C , I(C) = I(C \ α), so I(C) −(I(C) − I(C \ {α}))I(C \α) = 0. Straightforwardly if α /∈ C , I(C) = I(C \α). So the whole expression S Isums to 0.(c−1)!(n−c)!n!α(K ) =C⊆K(cid:9)Finally, to show dominance we will proceed in a similar way as to show symmetry. Assume that α, β ∈ K are such thatα (cid:13) β and α (cid:3) ⊥. Then, by the dominance property of the underlying basic inconsistency measure, we know that for allC ⊆ K , I(C ∪ {α}) (cid:3) I(C ∪ {β}). Now by definition of the SIV S I(I(C) − I(C \ {α})). Let us show thatα(K ) =α(K ) (cid:3) S IS Iβ (K ) by showing (by cases) that the elements of the first sum are greater or equal to the corresponding elementsof the second one:(c−1)!(n−c)!n!C⊆K(cid:9)A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10261023• If α /∈ C and β /∈ C , then I(C) = I(C \ {α}) = I(C \ {β}), so I(C) − I(C \ {α}) (cid:3) I(C) − I(C \ {β}).• If α ∈ C and β ∈ C , then let us define Cto be such that C \ {α} = C(cid:3) ∪ {β}. So we also have C \ {β} = C(cid:3)(cid:3) ∪ {α}. Now notethat by hypothesis I(C(cid:3) ∪ {β}) (cid:2) I(C• If α ∈ C and β /∈ C . Then I(C) − I(C \ {β}) = 0. Let us denote C = C(cid:3)(cid:3) \ {α}) = 0. So I(C(cid:3)(cid:3)) − I(C(cid:3)(cid:3)) − I(C(cid:3)(cid:3) \ {α}) (cid:3) I(C) − I(C \ {β}). Note that I(C(cid:3) ∪ {α}), so I(C \ {α}) (cid:2) I(C \ {β}). Hence I(C) − I(C \ {α}) (cid:3) I(C) − I(C \ {β}).(cid:3) ∪ {α} where C(cid:3) ∩ {α} = ∅, and C(cid:3)(cid:3) = C(cid:3)(cid:3) \ {β}) = I(C \ {α}) = I(C(cid:3) ∪ {β}. Now(cid:3)).(cid:3)(cid:3)) by the hypothesis, we also have I(C) − I(C \ {α}) (cid:3) I(C(cid:3)(cid:3)) − I(C(cid:3)(cid:3) \ {β}).notice that I(CAs we can deduce I(C) (cid:3) I(CAs with symmetry, we can then obtain a bijection that allows us to show dominance. (cid:2)(cid:9)Proof of Proposition 7. To prove consistency note that if K is consistent, then for every C ⊆ K , I(C) = 0 (this is a directconsequence of the consistency property of the underlying basic inconsistency measure). Then for every α ∈ K , S Iα(K ) = 0.Hence ˆS I (K ) = maxα∈K S Iα(K ) = 0. For the only if direction, by contradiction, suppose that ˆS I (K ) = 0 and that K is notconsistent. As K is not consistent, then by the consistency property of the underlying basic inconsistency measure I(K ) =a (cid:21)= 0. By the distribution property of the SIV we know thatα(K ) > 0, soˆS I (K ) = maxα∈K S Iα(K ) > 0. Contradiction.α(K ) = a (cid:21)= 0, then ∃α ∈ K such that S ITo show the free formula independence property, just notice that for any formula β that is a free formula of K ∪ {β}, it isα(K ∪ {β}).also a free formula of every one of its subsets. It is easy to see from the definition that for any α ∈ K , S IThis is easier if we consider the second form of the definition: S Iσ ) where σn is the setof possible permutations on ¯K . Now note that for S Iα(K ∪ {β}), the free formula does not bring any contradiction, so itdoes not change the marginal contribution of any other formula. Let us call the extensions of a permutation σ on K by β,all the permutations of K ∪ {β} whose restriction on elements of K is identical to σ , i.e. an extension of σ = (α1, . . . , αn)by β is a permutation σ (cid:3) = (α1, . . . , αi, β, αi+1, . . . , αn). Now note that there are n + 1 such extensions, and that if σ (cid:3)is∪ {α}) − I(pαan extension of σ , I(pασ )σ∪ {α}) − I(pαα(K ∪ {α}) == 1n!ˆS I (K ).σ ) = I(pασ (cid:3) ∪ {α}) − I(pαα(K ). Since for any α ∈ K , we have S Iα(K ∪ {β}) = 1α(K ) = S Iα(K ∪ {β}), we can also get ˆS I∪ {α}) − I(pασ ) = S I(n+1)! (n + 1)∪ {α}) − I(pαα(K ) = 1n!α(K ) = S Iσ (cid:3) ). So S Iα∈K S II(pασI(pασI(pασσ ∈σnσ ∈σnσ ∈σn(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)The upper bound property is stated by rewriting I(K ) asby recalling the definition of ˆS I (K ) as maxα∈K S I(cid:9)α∈K S Iα(K ) (cid:2)(cid:9)α∈K S Iα(K ) with the distribution property of the SIV, andα(K ). Now by noticing that for every vector a = (a1, . . . , an), maxai ∈a ai (cid:2)α(K ), i.e. ˆS I (K ) (cid:2) I(K ).ai ∈a ai , we conclude maxα∈K S ITo show isolation the if direction is straightforward: As α is inconsistent, K is inconsistent, and by the consistencyproperty of the underlying basic inconsistency measure we know that I(K ) > 0. By the free formula property of SIV, forα(K ) = I(K ), this means thatβ (K ) = 0. As by the distribution property we haveevery free formula β of K we have S Iα(K ). So ˆS I (K ) = I(K ) > 0. For the only if direction suppose that ˆS I (K ) =α(K ) = I(K ), and that ˆS I (K ) = maxα∈K S IS II(K ), that means that maxα∈K S Iα(K ). So itα(K ) = I(K ) (consequence of the definition ofα(K ) =means that maxα∈K S Ithe max), and if there exists a β (cid:21)= α such that S Iα(K ) > I(K ). Contradiction. So it means that thereβ (K ) = 0. That means that every β is a free formula, and that α isis α such that S Iinconsistent. (cid:2)α(K ) = I(K ). But, by the distribution property we know that I(K ) =α∈K S Iα(K ) = I(K ). There exists α such that S Iβ (K ) > 0, thenα(K ) = I(K ) and for every β (cid:21)= α, S Iα(K ) = S Iα∈K S Iα∈K S Iα∈K S I(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Proof of Proposition 8. Let us first show the following lemma that will be useful in the proof.Lemma 1. If a simple game in coalitional form on a set of players N = {1, . . . , n} is defined by a single winning coalition C(cid:3) ⊆ N, i.e.:v(C) =(cid:7)1 if C(cid:3) ⊆ C0 otherwiseThen the corresponding Shapley value is:S i(v) =(cid:14)01|C (cid:3)|if i /∈ Cif i ∈ C(cid:3)(cid:3)Proof of Lemma 1. By (Dummy) we get that if i /∈ Ccoalition N must be shared in the sum of the Shapley values of the players:know that S i(v) = 0, it means that this has to be split between the members of Cwe get that for all i, j ∈ C, then S i(v) = 0. By (Efficiency) we know that the outcome of the grandwe(cid:9)i∈C (cid:3) S i(v) = 1. Now by (Symmetry)i∈N S i(v) = 1. Since for players i /∈ C(cid:3). So, we have S i(v) = S j(v). So this implies that if i ∈ C, then S i(v) = 1(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)|C (cid:3)| .Let us now state the result. First suppose that α is a free formula of K , then we have immediately by (Minimality) thatS IMIα (K ) = 0. We also have immediately by definition that MIV C (K , α) = 0. So the equality is satisfied in this case.1024A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026Now suppose that α is not a free formula of K . First remark that IMI can be decomposed in IMI(C) =where ˆM is the following characteristic function(cid:7)ˆM(C) =1 if M ⊆ C0 otherwiseLet us denote by ˆM(K ) the game in coalitional form defined from K and the characteristic function ˆM.So now let us start from the MI Shapley Inconsistency Value:(cid:9)M∈MI(K )ˆM(C),(cid:5)C \ {α}(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5)IMI(C) − IMI(cid:10) (cid:8)ˆM(C) −(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:5)ˆMC \ {α}M∈MI(K )(cid:5)(cid:10) (cid:8)M∈MI(K )(cid:5)ˆM(C) − ˆMC \ {α}(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:6)M∈MI(K )(cid:5)(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!ˆM(C) − ˆM(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!(cid:5)ˆM(C) − ˆM(cid:5)(cid:5)C \ {α}C \ {α}(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)α (K ) =S IMI=====(cid:8)C⊆K(cid:8)C⊆K(cid:8)C⊆K(cid:8)(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!(c − 1)!(n − c)!n!(cid:8)C⊆KM∈MI(K )(cid:8)(cid:8)M∈MI(K )(cid:8)C⊆K(cid:5)SαM∈MI(K )(cid:6)ˆM(K )Now note that by Lemma 1 we have Sα( ˆM(K )) = 1|M| .That gives S IMI|M| = MIV C (K , α). (cid:2)α (K ) =M∈MI(K )(cid:9)1Proof of Proposition 10. To prove that the MI Shapley Inconsistency Value satisfies the logical properties is easy. (Distribu-tion), (Symmetry), (Minimality) are satisfied by all Shapley Inconsistency Values (Proposition 6).So it remains to show (Decomposability) and (MinInc). (MinInc) is satisfied by definition since IMI(M) = |MI(M)| = 1 forany M ∈ MI(K ).For (Decomposability), note that the hypothesis |MI(K 1 ∪ · · · ∪ Kn)| = |MI(K1)| + · · · + |MI(Kn)| implies that every minimalinconsistent set of K1 ∪ · · · ∪ Kn is exactly in one K i . So for each M ∈ MI(K1 ∪ · · · ∪ Kn), then ∃i s.t. M ∈ MI(K i) and ∀ j (cid:21)= iM /∈ MI(K j). So from the hypothesis we obtain(cid:8)M∈MI(K1∪···∪Kn)1|M|=(cid:8)M∈MI(K1)1|M|+ · · · +(cid:8)M∈MI(Kn)1|M|And from Proposition 8 we know that(cid:8)α (K ) =S IMIM∈MI(K ) s.t. α∈M1|M|That means that Eq. (1) is equivalent to(1)α (K1 ∪ · · · ∪ Kn) = S IMIS IMIα (K1) + · · · + S IMIα (Kn)For the converse implication suppose that we have an inconsistency value that satisfies (Distribution), (Symmetry), (Min-imality), (Decomposability) and (MinInc). We want to show that it is the MI Shapley Inconsistency Value. From the use of(Minimality) and (Decomposability) we have thatα(K ) =S I(cid:8)M∈MI(K )S Iα(M)Now for each M if α /∈ M we have by (Minimality) that S I(cid:9)α(M) = 0. And if α ∈ M then we have by (Distribution)α∈M S Iα(M) = I(M). And by (Symmetry) we have that ∀α, β ∈ M, S Iα(M) = S Iβ (M). So we obtain that∀α ∈ M,α(M) = I(M)S I|M|A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–10261025and thereforeα(K ) =S I(cid:8)M∈MI(K ) s.t. α∈MI(M)|M|Now by (MinInc) we know that for all M ∈ MI(K ), I(M) = 1. That gives(cid:8)α(K ) =S IM∈MI(K ) s.t. α∈M1|M|That is the definition of MI Shapley Inconsistency Value. (cid:2)AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank CNRS and the Royal Society for travel funding while collaborating on this research. Theauthors would like to thank the reviewers for their valuable comments.References[1] C. Alchourrón, P. Gärdenfors, D. Makinson, On the logic of theory change: Partial meet contraction and revision functions, Journal of Symbolic Logic 50(1985) 510–530.[2] R.J. Aumann, S. Hart (Eds.), Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, vol. 3, North-Holland, 2002.[3] S. Benferhat, D. Dubois, H. Prade, Argumentative inference in uncertain and inconsistent knowledge bases, in: Proceedings of the International Confer-ence on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI’93), Morgan Kaufmann, 1993, pp. 411–419.[4] S. Benferhat, D. Dubois, H. Prade, Some syntactic approaches to the handling of inconsistent knowledge bases: A comparative study, Part 1: The flatcase, Studia Logica 58 (1997) 17–45.[5] R. Booth, T. Meyer, Admissible and restrained revision, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 26 (2006) 127–151.[6] R. Booth, A negotiation-style framework for non-prioritised revision, in: Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Theoretical Aspects of Rationality andKnowledge (TARK’01), 2001, pp. 137–150.[7] R. Booth, Social contraction and belief negotiation, in: Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning(KR’02), 2002, pp. 374–384.[8] R. Booth, Social contraction and belief negotiation, Information Fusion 7 (1) (2006) 19–34.[9] B. Barragáns-Martínez, J.J. Pazos-Arias, A. Fernández-Vilas, On measuring levels of inconsistency in multi-perspective requirements specifications, in:Proceedings of the First Conference on the Principles of Software Engineering (PRISE’04), 2004, pp. 21–30.[10] B. Barragáns-Martínez, J.J. Pazos-Arias, A. Fernández-Vilas, Merging requirements views with incompleteness and inconsistency, in: Proceedings of theIEEE Australian Software Engineering Conference (ASWEC’05), IEEE Computer Society Press, 2005.[11] G. Brewka, Preferred subtheories: An extended logical framework for default reasoning, in: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Joint Conferenceon Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’89), 1989, pp. 1043–1048.[12] Q. Chen, C. Zhang, S. Zhang, A verification model for electronic transaction protocols, in: Advanced Web Technologies and Applications, in: LNCS,vol. 3007, Springer, 2004, pp. 824–833.[13] J. Delgrande, D. Dubois, J. Lang, Iterated revision as prioritized merging, in: Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Principles of Knowl-edge Representation and Reasonin (KR’06), AAAI Press, 2006, pp. 210–220.[14] D. Dubois, J. Lang, H. Prade, Possibilistic logic, in: C. Hogger, D. Gabbay, J. Robinson (Eds.), Handbook of Logic in Artificial Intelligence and LogicProgramming, vol. 3, Oxford University Press, 1994, pp. 439–513.[15] A. Darwiche, J. Pearl, On the logic of iterated belief revision, Artificial Intelligence 89 (1997) 1–29.[16] T. Eiter, G. Gottlob, On the complexity of propositional knowledge base revision, updates, and counterfactuals, Artificial Intelligence 57 (2–3) (1992)227.[17] N. Friedman, J.Y. Halpern, Belief revision: A critique, in: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representationand Reasoning (KR’96), 1996, pp. 421–431.[18] J. Grant, A. Hunter, Measuring inconsistency in knowledgebases, Journal of Intelligent Information Systems 27 (2006) 159–184.[19] O. Gauwin, S. Konieczny, P. Marquis, Conciliation and consensus in iterated belief merging, in: Proceedings of the Eighth European Conference onSymbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty (ECSQARU’05), 2005, pp. 514–526.[20] E. Gregoire, B. Mazure, C. Piette, Boosting a complete technique to find MSS and MUS thanks to a local search oracle, in: Proceedings of the Interna-tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’07), 2007, pp. 2300–2305.[21] E. Gregoire, B. Mazure, C. Piette, Using local search to find MSSes and MUSes, European Journal of Operational Research 199 (3) (2009) 640–646.[22] J. Grant, Classifications for inconsistent theories, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 19 (1978) 435–444.[23] S.O. Hansson, What’s new isn’t always best, Theoria 63 (1998) 1–13 (Special issue on non-prioritized belief revision).[24] A. Hunter, S. Konieczny, Approaches to measuring inconsistent information, in: Inconsistency Tolerance, in: LNCS, vol. 3300, Springer, 2005, pp. 189–234.[25] A. Hunter, S. Konieczny, Measuring inconsistency through minimal inconsistent sets, in: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference onPrinciples of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR’08), 2008, pp. 358–366.[26] A. Hunter, W. Liu, Knowledge base stratification and merging based on degree of support, in: Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference onSymbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty (ECSQARU’09), in: LNCS, vol. 5590, Springer, 2009, pp. 385–395.[27] A. Hunter, Measuring inconsistency in knowledge via quasi-classical models, in: Proceedings of the Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence (AAAI’02), MIT Press, 2002, pp. 68–73.[28] A. Hunter, Logical comparison of inconsistent perspectives using scoring functions, Knowledge and Information Systems 6 (5) (2004) 528–543.[29] A. Hunter, How to act on inconsistent news: Ignore, resolve, or reject, Data and Knowledge Engineering 57 (2006) 221–239.[30] Y. Jin, M. Thielscher, Iterated belief revision, revised, Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1–18.[31] J. Kemeny, A logical measure function, Journal of Symbolic Logic 18 (1953) 289–308.[32] S. Konieczny, J. Lang, P. Marquis, Quantifying information and contradiction in propositional logic through epistemic tests, in: Proceedings of theEighteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’03), 2003, pp. 106–111.1026A. Hunter, S. Konieczny / Artificial Intelligence 174 (2010) 1007–1026[33] S. Konieczny, J. Lang, P. Marquis, DA2 merging operators, Artificial Intelligence 157 (2004) 49–79.[34] S. Konieczny, J. Lang, P. Marquis, Reasoning under inconsistency: The forgotten connective, in: Nineteenth International Joint Conference on ArtificialIntelligence (IJCAI’05), 2005, pp. 484–489.[35] K.M. Knight, Measuring inconsistency, Journal of Philosophical Logic 31 (2002) 77–98.[36] K.M. Knight, Two information measures for inconsistent sets, Journal of Logic, Language and Information 12 (2003) 227–248.[37] S. Konieczny, Belief base merging as a game, Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics 14 (3) (2004) 275–294.[38] D. Lehmann, M. Magidor, What does a conditional knowledge base entail? Artificial Intelligence 55 (1992) 1–60.[39] E. Lozinskii, Resolving contradictions: A plausible semantics for inconsistent systems, Journal of Automated Reasoning 12 (1994) 1–31.[40] R.D. Luce, H. Raiffa, Games and Decision, Wiley, 1957.[41] T. Meyer, N. Foo, D. Zhang, R. Kwok, Logical foundations of negotiation: Strategies and preferences, in: Proceedings of the Ninth International Confer-ence on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR’04), 2004, pp. 311–318.[42] K. Mu, Z. Jin, R. Lu, W. Liu, Measuring inconsistency in requirements engineering, in: Proceedings of the Eighth European Conference on Symbolic andQuantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty (ECSQARU’05), in: LNAI, vol. 3571, Springer, 2005, pp. 440–451.[43] R. Manor, N. Rescher, On inferences from inconsistent information, Theory and Decision 1 (1970) 179–219.[44] D. Monderer, D. Samet, Variations on the Shapley value, in: Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, vol. 3, North-Holland, 2002,pp. 2055–2076.[45] B. Nebel, Belief revision and default reasoning: Syntax-based approaches, in: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on the Principles ofKnowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR’91), 1991, pp. 417–428.[46] J.B. Paris, The Uncertain Reasoner’s Companion: A Mathematical Perspective, Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 39, CambridgeUniversity Press, 1994.[47] J. Pearl, System Z: A natural ordering of defaults with tractable applications to nonmonotonic reasoning, in: TARK ’90: Proceedings of the 3rd Confer-ence on Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning about Knowledge, 1990, pp. 121–135.[48] G. Priest, Minimally inconsistent LP, Studia Logica 50 (1991) 321–331.[49] R. Reiter, A theory of diagnosis from first principles, Artificial Intelligence 32 (1987) 57–95.[50] L.S. Shapley, A value for n-person games, in: H.W. Kuhn, A.W. Tucker (Eds.), Contributions to the Theory of Games II, in: Annals of Mathematics Studies,vol. 28, Princeton University Press, 1953, pp. 307–317.[51] W. Spohn, Ordinal conditional functions: A dynamic theory of epistemic states, in: W.L. Harper, B. Skyrms (Eds.), Causation in Decision, Belief Change,and Statistics, vol. 2, Princeton University Press, 1987, pp. 105–134.[52] M. Thimm, Measuring inconsistency in probabilistic knowledge bases, in: Proceedings of the Twenty Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in ArtificialIntelligence (UAI’09), 2009.[53] P. Wong, Ph. Besnard, Paraconsistent reasoning as an analytic tool, Journal of the Interest Group in Propositional Logic 9 (2001) 233–246.[54] M. Williams, Iterated theory base change: A computational model, in: Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence (IJCAI’95), 1995, pp. 1541–1547.[55] D. Zhang, N. Foo, T. Meyer, R. Kwok, Negotiation as mutual belief revision, in: Proceedings of the Nineteenth American National Conference on ArtificialIntelligence (AAAI’04), 2004, pp. 317–322.