Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cmpb Reconstruction of the fetus face from three-dimensional ultrasound using a newborn face statistical shape model Antonia Alomar a , ∗, Araceli Morales a , Kilian Vellvé b , Antonio R. Porras c , d , Fatima Crispi b , Marius George Linguraru e , f , Gemma Piella a , Federico Sukno a a Department of Information and Communications Technologies, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain b Fetal Medicine Research Center (BCNatal), Hospital Clinic and Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain c Department of Biostatistics and Informatics-Colorado School of Public Health, Department of Pediatrics-School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus Aurora, CO, U.S.A d Departments of Pediatric Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery and Neurosurgery, Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, U.S.A e Sheikh Zayed Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation, Children’s National Hospital, Washington, D.C., U.S.A f Departments of Radiology and Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, D.C., U.S.A a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history: Received 23 August 2021 Accepted 13 May 2022 Keywords: Craniofacial defects 3D statistical shape model Physical defects 3D segmentation Fetal face Background and objective: The fetal face is an essential source of information in the assessment of con- genital malformations and neurological anomalies. Disturbance in early stages of development can lead to a wide range of effects, from subtle changes in facial and neurological features to characteristic fa- cial shapes observed in craniofacial syndromes. Three-dimensional ultrasound (3D US) can provide more detailed information about the facial morphology of the fetus than the conventional 2D US, but its use for pre-natal diagnosis is challenging due to imaging noise, fetal movements, limited field-of-view, low soft-tissue contrast, and occlusions. Methods: In this paper, we propose the use of a novel statistical morphable model of newborn faces, the BabyFM, for fetal face reconstruction from 3D US images. We test the feasibility of using newborn statistics to accurately reconstruct fetal faces by fitting the regularized morphable model to the noisy 3D US images. Results: The results indicate that the reconstructions are quite accurate in the central-face and less reli- able in the lateral regions (mean point-to-surface error of 2.35 mm vs 4.86 mm). The algorithm is able to reconstruct the whole facial morphology of babies from US scans while handle adverse conditions (e.g. missing parts, noisy data). Conclusions: The proposed algorithm has the potential to aid in-utero diagnosis for conditions that in- volve facial dysmorphology. © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 1. Introduction Craniofacial anomalies are among the most common birth de- fects [1,2] . They encompass a wide range of heterogeneous condi- tions with many associated genetic syndromes. It is estimated that up to 40% of genetic disorders produce alterations in the normal morphology of the face and the head [3,4] , and these congeni- tal malformations can impact swallowing, breathing, hearing, vi- sion, speech, and -more importantly- cognitive development. Thus, ∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: antonia.alomar@upf.edu (A. Alomar) . craniofacial dysmorphology has been highlighted as an index of developmental disturbance at early stages of life. While these asso- ciations have been established mainly using data from adult popu- lations, there is a growing interest in early assessment by focusing on children and newborns [5–7] . In this paper, we explore the fea- sibility of assessing craniofacial morphology already before birth by analyzing 3D US images of the fetal face. The fetal face provides essential information in the evaluation of congenital malformations and fetal brain function, as its devel- opment is driven by genetic factors at the first stages of embryo- genesis. In this sense, facial mass, brain, and skull are inseparable, as they belong to the same neural compartment. In consequence, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.106893 0169-2607/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 if a developmental gene is defective in a differentiation, migration or in prominence formation, the fetus cannot undergo satisfactory morphogenesis and can result in morphogenetic disturbances, such as clefts, hypoplastia, fistulas and ectodermic cysts [8] . Early recognition and assessment of craniofacial conditions is often crucial for the effective treatment of functional and devel- opmental aspects [5] . For this reason, diagnosis is shifting from at birth or childhood towards prenatal. This is important for parent counseling and careful planning of delivery and post-natal treat- ment. Moreover, in case of poor prognosis such as multiple anoma- lies or associated aneuploidies, it may also aid in the management of the pregnancy [9,10] . In clinical practice, the fetal face is assessed by visual inspec- tion of routinary prenatal US scans [11,12] . Unfortunately, dysmor- phology is hard to identify in this way, mainly because of the wide range of morphological features involved and the challeng- ing nature of US prenatal scans (low signal-to-noise ratio, fetal or probe movements, fetal position, and limbs in front of the face). Moreover, dysmorphology patterns tend to be subtle in most disor- ders, and they can affect any of the spatial components of the face (right-left, cranio-caudal, anterior-posterior). For these reasons, an accurate 3D model of the fetal face could play a crucial role in pre- natal diagnosis, allowing a detailed analysis of the facial geome- try and providing a low-cost tool for genetic pre-screening, i.e., to highlight suspicious cases for further study. Such analysis must necessarily be addressed in relative terms with respect to a reference population of normal morphology, for which 3D Morphable Models (3DMM) are a valuable tool. 3DMMs [13] encode the anatomical variability of the facial geometry in a given population within a statistical model, which can be used to fit and analyze new data. Nonetheless, a crucial aspect to consider when using a 3DMM is that the statistics encoded in the model must match those of the target population, e.g. in terms of eth- nicity, gender and, especially important for our application, age. The latter has been an important obstacle for the application of pre-existing 3DMMs to fetal or neonatal data, since all available 3DMMs were built from adults and, although sometimes they also included children, none of them included babies. However, in a recent work [14] , we published the Baby Face Model (BabyFM), which constitutes the first 3DMM built exclusively from babies, with an important proportion of newborns. Also, [15] has shown how craniofacial deformations can be accurately computed from 3D surfaces using a normative statistical shape model build from newborn subjects. We hypothesize that an adequate adaptation of models built from newborns could serve as statistical constraints to guide the representation of fetal geometry, which is expected to pro- duce not only improvements in accuracy (given the higher qual- ity of the data used to construct the model), but also a way to relate the fetal face geometry to the one expected at birth. This would make it possible to use the available knowledge about the craniofacial anomalies in babies to address an ear- lier screening of craniofacial dysmorphologies already during fetal life. high accuracy and fast detection speed on a large fetal data set. In [17] , they also combined both 3D and 2D information to automat- ically extract the facial surface from a stack of 2D US slices. There are some works on generating physical fetal models (al- though not face specific) from 3D US, magnetic resonance imag- ing, and computer tomography, either separately or combined [18,19] . However, they involve slice-by-slice manual segmentation and post-processing with proprietary software. Despite the te- dious processing, they concluded that physical prototypes are use- ful when dealing with complex congenital malformations and may improve antenatal surgical planning. In [20] , they proposed a re- construction method to build 3D printed models of fetal faces from routine 3D US. Their method involved threshold-based segmenta- tion, manual point cloud elaboration and merging, and 3D CAD model construction. They also presented preliminary results of a survey aiming to evaluate the possible benefits of the use of 3D printed models for future parents. They concluded that 3D models are a valuable tool for parents not only from an emotional point of view, but also from a medical point of view, mainly in the presence of diseases or malformations. In [21] , they evaluated the feasibility of quantitative assessment of 3D US facial volumes using statistical shape models. They con- structed their model from 20 surfaces meshes and found statisti- cally significant differences between the facial shape of normal and abnormal fetuses, although the number of cases was limited. They also required detailed manual segmentation and 3D reconstruc- tion from proprietary software to extract the facial surfaces. To ac- celerate the process of data augmentation of the statistical shape models created, the same investigation group proposed in [22] a semi-automatic reconstruction algorithm based on multi-atlas propagation segmentation. However, the results show that more data need to be added to the model to obtain feasible reconstruc- tions, as the model quality is limited to the US resolution and qual- ity. 1.2. Contribution In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of analyzing fetal 3D US images with the help of a recently proposed statistical model constructed from 3D scans of babies and newborns: the BabyFM. Differently from previous works, we do not build our model di- rectly from the noisy fetal images, but employ statistics from new- borns to constrain the geometric reconstruction of the fetal face. In this way, we circumvent the difficulties associated with build- ing accurate models from the noisy 3D US images at the expense of extrapolating the face statistics from newborns to fetuses. We present a 3D US fitting algorithm to reconstruct the pre-natal fetal face from 3D US using the BabyFM statistical model. As we do not have the baby growth-truth we estimate the post-natal face from multiple 2D images in order to perform the validation of the fetal face obtained in the 3D US fitting. Tests on a set of 129 fetal scans show promising results in both qualitative and quantitative terms, even in adverse conditions (e.g. missing parts, noisy data). 1.1. 3D Fetal face reconstruction 2. Materials Little research has been done in 3D face reconstruction from fe- tal images, mainly due to the limitations of prenatal imaging itself. Nevertheless, advancements in 3D US have fueled a growing inter- est in developing algorithms and techniques to obtain and analyze 3D fetal faces. One of the first works to automatically detect fetal faces from 3D US is [16] , who combined 3D facial surface detection and 2D face profile detection to find the optimal acquisition plane for face rendering, and proposed a carving algorithm to remove all obstructions and enhance the 3D rendering. Their results showed 2.1. 3D Baby face morphable model 3D morphable models (3DMMs) are tools for representing 3D shapes and textures. They are parametric models that enable many applications in domains of face recognition, entertainment, medi- cal applications, forensics, cognitive science, neuroscience, and psy- chology [23] . 3DMMs and statistical shape models (SSM) are also a popular standard framework in medical imaging segmentation and largely used as models of variations in anatomical structures. 2 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 Fig. 1. Illustration of the 23 anatomical landmarks considered in this work. In the context of face analysis, the idea is learning a general 3D face model that is able to encode the statistics of facial shape of a target population (optionally including appearance). The con- struction of a 3DMM generally consists of two main parts: 1) es- tablishing point-to-point correspondences between the 3D faces in the training set, and 2) building a model with the registered data, typically using principal component analysis (PCA) [13,24,25] . A 3DMM is described by the shape basis matrix (cid:2) ∈ R 3 N×M , whose columns are the orthogonal eigenvectors -principal components- obtained by PCA. Here, N corresponds to the number of vertices and M to the number of principal components that are retained, which define the dimensionality of the model. A 3DMM allows us to create a deformable mesh whose shape is determined by the parameters α ∈ R M as follows: x ≈ (cid:2)α + ¯x (1) where x ∈ R 3 N contains the coordinates of the N vertices of the 3D face mesh and ¯x is the mean shape of the model. Unfortunately, although there are several 3DMMs that are pub- licly available for adults and children, the facial morphology of ba- bies and fetuses differs much from that of adults (and even chil- dren). For this reason, in [14] we addressed the construction of the BabyFM, which is the first 3DMM to date built exclusively from in- fants, including a large proportion of newborns. In this paper we will used the proposed BabyFM to achieve the fetal face segmen- tation from the 3D US scans. The BabyFM was built with data obtained at the Children’s Na- tional Hospital in Washington D.C. The dataset consisted of 45 3D scans of baby faces (mean age 8 . 42 ± 6 . 45 months). Several ethnic- ities were included: Caucasian (47%), African American (24%), His- panic (20%), and Asian (9%). Also, the data were roughly gender- balanced: 56% male and 44% female. The BabyFM comprises the facial region delimited by the chin, the forehead and the ears, and also provides the indexes of the vertices for 23 anatomical land- marks ( Fig. 1 ). 2.2. Database 2.2.1. Pre-natal data corresponding to different viewing angles (see Fig. 4 ). The mean gestational age of the 3D US scans was 30 . 26 ± 10 . 22 weeks. These fetuses are independent to any of the babies used for the construc- tion of the BabyFM. The 3D US scans were obtained at the Hospital Clinic de Barcelona (BCNatal) according to its Ethical Research Committee and the current legislation (Organic Law 15/1999). The ultrasono- graphic evaluation of the fetuses was performed with static 3D acquisitions of the volume on the midsagittal view of the fetal face. Images were acquired using a General Electric Voluson E6 (General Electric, IL, USA) US machine with a low-frequency probe (4–8 MHz). From the volumetric images, 3D meshes were extracted by ap- plying an automatic threshold segmentation with 3D-Slicer 4.10.2 1 . The obtained meshes contained not only face but also other parts of the fetus’ body, placenta, and noise. Using the Markup module of 3D-Slicer, we positioned in each fetal scan a subset of the 23 targeted landmarks, according to their visibility. The landmarks used are anatomical features that can be easily identified in a baby face, see Fig. 1 . However, the identifica- tion of these 23 anatomical landmarks in the fetal scan is challeng- ing because of occlusions (e.g. the baby may be positioned with the hand on the face) and the noisy nature of the data. Thus, a variable fraction of the targeted landmarks could be positioned at every fetus, depending on visibility, as indicated in Table 1 . For example, notice how the landmarks of the ears (tR, oiR, tL, and oiL) where never positioned in the US scans as the viewing angles taken did not allow acquisition of the ears due to occlusions and noise, whereas landmarks in the nose (n, prn, acR, and sn) were successfully identified in almost all of the US scans. 2.2.2. Post-natal data Additionally to the US scans, 2D post-natal photographs were also available for 8 out of the 29 scanned babies. These pictures were taken by the parents from 3 different viewpoints (left/right profiles and frontal) directly using their mobile phones; this sim- ple setup was meant to avoid having to scan newborn babies with special equipment. The post-natal images were used to obtain a To evaluate our methods, 129 3D US scans from 29 fetuses were collected, i.e., there were multiple 3D US images for each fetus, 1 https://www.slicer.org . 3 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 Table 1 Percentage of meshes where each anatomical landmark was positioned successfully. Positioned Anatomical Landmarks exR enR n enL exL acR aR prn aL acL 46.51% 73.64% 96.90% 65.12% 30.23% 87.60% 82.17% 92.25% 79.07% 78.29% sn chR cphR ls cphL chL li sl pg 89.15% 57.36% 65.89% 67.44% 67.44% 48.84% 63.57% 59.69% 58.91% oiR 0% tL 0% tR 0 oiL 0% Fig. 2. Overview of the pipeline proposed. The first and second rows illustrate the procedure for obtaining the pre-natal and post-natal reconstructions, respectively. Then, both outputs are compared to obtain the surface error map between both reconstructions. 2D-3D reconstruction of the baby face to which we could quan- titatively and qualitatively compare the facial geometry estimated from the fetal imaging (see Section 4.2 ). 3. Methods Our data processing pipeline consists of two main stages: US fitting (pre-natal) and multiple image fitting (post-natal) (see Fig. 2 ). First, the 3D reconstruction of the fetal face is obtained from the 3D US images by fitting the BabyFM to it, i.e. finding the shape parameters α in the 3DMM that best reproduce the face observed in the US. At this stage, the BabyFM works as a statis- tical shape constraint allowing a better robustness to noise and other artifacts. Second, the 3D post-natal face is reconstructed from the 2D images to compare the morphology estimated from fetal imaging with respect to the actual outcome after birth, where the BabyFM is used to estimate the facial 3D geometry. 3.1. 3D ultrasound fitting In this section we describe our algorithm to obtain the 3D re- construction of the fetal face from the 3D US scan and the facial landmarks described in Section 2.2 . The implemented algorithm can be divided in the following steps: landmark-based initializa- tion, automatic cropping, statistical model-based Non-Rigid Itera- tive Closest Point fitting (NICP), and mesh refinement, as explained next. 3.1.1. Landmark-based initialization A first estimation of the 3D fetal face is obtained taking into account only the landmarks positioned in the US mesh. For this, a two-stage iterative procedure consisting of (1) landmark alignment and (2) shape parameter calculation is performed. In the landmark alignment stage, Procrustes analysis [26] is used to find a similarity transformation to fit the current model estimate (initialized with the mean of the BabyFM) to the US landmarks. Then, the shape parameters ( α) that best match the fetal face in the US scan are estimated by solving the morphable model equation described in Eq. (2 , α = (cid:2)T (2) where (cid:2)r is the reduced shape basis matrix (i.e., the rows of (cid:2)that correspond to the landmarks), and ˆ x r is the current model estimate of the landmark positions. To ensure that the shape pa- rameters describe a plausible face, α is regularized as described in Eq. (3) . r (x − ˆ x r ) , The two-stage landmark-based fitting is iterated 20 times to en- sure convergence. This first estimation will serve as a first align- ment and shape adaptation of the model to the 3D US scans, the better the initialization, the easier will be for the NICP to converge to a solution that is faithful to the US shape observed. 3.1.2. Automatic cropping Our input US scans cover a variable part of the fetus that is nor- mally not restricted solely to the head and face. This leads to input meshes that can easily reach 1 million vertices, many of which are of no interest to quantify the craniofacial morphology and can un- necessarily increase the computational cost. For this reason, we au- tomatically crop the input US mesh before further processing. We do so by taking advantage of the landmark-based initialization de- scribed in the previous section, whose vertices are used as centers to compute radial neighborhoods that determine what points from the input US mesh are retained. In other words, any point from the input US mesh whose distance is further than the specified ra- dius from the landmark-based initialization is removed. Also, the 4 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 non-connected components are removed to reduce the presence of scattered noise in the US mesh. In the experiments reported in this paper, we have set the radial neighborhood to 10 mm. Notice that, thanks to the landmark-based initialization, this simple step allows an automatic cropping without the need for volume segmentation on the 3D US scan. 3.1.3. Statistical model-based NICP fitting The fetal face reconstruction obtained from the landmark-based initialization is refined using a NICP algorithm. This is a widely used algorithm for geometric alignment of 3D models when an ini- tial estimate of the relative pose is known. It consists in five main stages: i) point selection, ii) matching points (or correspondences); iii) weights; iv) pairs rejection or constraints; v) minimization of the error. There exist many versions of NICP varying from the se- lection and matching to the minimization strategy [27,28] . In our implementation, every iteration consists of using the NICP algorithm to fit the current face estimate to the 3D US mesh and then recovering the model’s shape parameters α, as in Eq. (2) but now using all rows of (cid:2) rather than (cid:2)r , thus employ- ing the whole surface. Point selection and matching are performed by finding the closest sample of the model vertices in the US mesh. Then, to reduce the presence of outliers, the point-matching is per- formed under some distance, uniqueness, normal and neighbour- hood consistency constraints (see Section 3.3 ). This process is re- peated by alternating between the correspondence mapping and the model’s parameter update followed by statistical regularization, until the error difference between consecutive iterations is below a predefined threshold. The linear system (cid:2)α = (x − ¯x ) is solved using a least square formulation. The estimated shape parameters obtained must be regularized since not all linear combinations of the columns of (cid:2) (or (cid:2)r in the case of only using landmarks) represent a valid face. The shape parameters are assumed to follow a multivariate Gaussian distribution. Therefore, to obtain plausible faces, we need to ensure that the shape parameter vectors lie within a hyper- ellipsoid in the parameter space, the size of which is determined by the variances (the eigenvalues) of the data. The regularised shape vector ˆ α is thus obtained by minimizing: of the template mesh to the positions in the target mesh, while moving the rest of the vertices as rigid as possible. Given a 3D mesh scan, X t emplat e ∈ R 3 ×N that refers to the mesh that we want to refine and a 3D target mesh X target ∈ R 3 ×p that contains the target facial parts that we want to copy to our tem- plate, to balance the desired problem the following weighted linear least squares system is solved: (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)λL 0 S X t emplat e re f ined = X (cid:4)λL 0 X t emplat e S X target X target (4) t emplat e where X re f ined is the adapted template that we are solving for, L 0 ∈ R p×p is the cotangent approximation of the LBO, S X ∈ [0 , 1] m ×p and S X target ∈ [0 , 1] m ×N matrices are the selection matrices of the m vertices that we want to refine, and λ is the parameter that determines the stiffness of the template mesh to the trans- formation. The selection matrices are binary patterns that contain 1 in the positions that belong to the facial parts in each corre- sponding scan and 0 in the rest. The first row of Eq. (4) aims at maintaining the template mesh structure while the second row en- forces the matching between the vertices defining the facial parts. The parameter λ weighs the relative contribution of the mesh re- finement (second row) and the regulation constraint (first row). If λ −→ 0 the facial parts of the template are moved exactly to cor- responding positions in the target mesh, but the template shape is not retained. Otherwise, if λ −→ ∞ the refined mesh retains the template shape but do not adapt well to the facial parts. A good λis chosen to give a good trade off between the refinement of the facial parts and the retaining of the template shape, without sharp transitions or distortions. In this paper to refine our mesh after the NICP, we consider the resulting NICP estimated mesh with 99.99999% of variance as the target mesh and the NICP estimated mesh regularized to only retain 95% of variance as the template mesh, and set λ = 0 . 1 . The facial parts that we want to refine correspond to the nose region vertices. Applying this refinement step we obtain a smoother mesh while maintaining the nose proportion presented in the US scan. 3.3. Constraints || ˆ α − α|| 2 min ˆ αsubject to (cid:2) ˆ α2 i λi i ≤ β 2 . Different types of pair rejections were implemented to reduce (3) the presence of outliers: where λi are the model’s eigenvalues and β is a constant that de- fines the hyper-ellipsoid size and is defined as the critical value of a chi-square distribution with M degrees of freedom, i.e., β 2 = χ 2 (p, M) , where p is the probability threshold at which shapes are considered plausible facial reconstructions and M is the number of modes of variations in the model. In this paper, p= 0.95 is used. 3.2. Mesh refinement The use of the statistics encoded in the BabyFM implies a trade off between accurate fitting to the image data and robustness to noise and artifacts. As we will show in Section 4 , the regulariza- tion effect introduced by the BabyFM clearly improves the overall quality of the reconstructions. Nonetheless, we have also detected some regions, such as the nose, in which the model over-constrains the solution, yielding a sub-optimal fitting to the input scan. This seems to happen because the nose of fetuses is proportionally big- ger than the nose of newborn. To tackle this, we introduce a final refinement step following [29] , in which the facial mesh is allowed to deform solely con- strained by the Laplacian-Beltrami operator (LBO). Using the LBO, a mesh selected as template is refined towards the desired facial parts. The idea behind this step is to transform those facial parts • Distance Constraint : rejection of correspondences that are fur- ther than a given threshold (in this paper d = 10 mm is used). It discards pairs from the US scan that are far from the current model estimate; usually the rejected pairs correspond to noise or non-face regions. • Uniqueness Constraint : rejection of points with more than one correspondence (soft pruning). It removes pairs that introduce a conflict; for example, moving multiple vertices to the same location. • Normal Constraint : rejection of correspondences with incom- patible surface normals ( (cid:7) > 45 ). It eliminates pairs of corre- spondences based on local estimates of the normal vectors of each vertex. • Neighbourhood Constraint : rejection of pairs that are not con- sistent with neighboring pairs. The mean difference distance between the k nearest neighbours to a given pair of corre- spondences is rejected if it exceeds a specified threshold (we use E((cid:8)q ) > 2 ). This enforces that the neighbours of the cor- respondences should be locally consistent between them, im- plying similar local structure. This mean difference distance is computed as: 1 K K (cid:2) k =1 | ( (cid:8) p us − q ( k, us ) (cid:8) − (cid:8) p model − q ( k, model ) (cid:8) ) | (5) E ( (cid:8)q ) = 5 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 where p us and p model are the correspondence being evaluated, while q (k,us ) and q (k,model) are the k nearest pairs of correspon- dences. 3.4. Multiple image fitting In order to quantitatively validate the fetal shapes estimated from the 3D US scans, we reconstruct the newborn 3D face from a set of three 2D images (frontal, left, and right pose) taken after birth. A 3DMM allows estimating the 3D facial geometry from one or more uncalibrated 2D pictures by fitting the model to them. We address the 3D-from-2D reconstruction problem using sparse geo- metric features -edges and landmarks- rather than fitting all facial pixels as in the analysis-by-synthesis approach, which is computa- tionally expensive and sensitive to initialization. Our approach is based on the algorithm proposed in [30] , but modifying the al- gorithm in order to consider multiple images rather than only a single image. The algorithm starts with an initialization of the 3D face, using only the landmarks, solving the linear system defined by mapping the vertices of the model to the 2D image space, un- der the assumption of a scaled orthographic projection 2 (SOP). The landmark fitting is then refined in an iterative closest point manner adding the closest edge pixel correspondence information. These correspondences are filtered using two heuristic rules: 1) re- moval of 5% of the matches with largest distance to the closest image edge pixel; 2) removal of matches for which the image dis- tance divided by the scale factor s exceeds a threshold (fixed em- pirically to 10). Finally, a non-linear optimization of the pose (rotation R , scal- ing s , and translation t) and shape parameters ( α) is performed by minimizing an hybrid objective function containing landmark, edge, and prior terms: E ( α, R, t, s ) = w 1 E lmk ( α, R, t, s ) + w 2 E Edge ( α, R, t, s ) + w 3 E Prior ( α) . (6) The prior term acts as a regularizer of the shape parameters based on the statistics encoded in the 3DMM: E Prior (α) = M (cid:2) αi (cid:5) ( λi i =1 ) 2 , (7) where λi are the model’s eigenvalues (variance of the modes of variation). The landmark term penalizes differences between the actual landmark position in the image and the one obtained by projecting the 3D model landmark: lmk (α, R, t, s ) = E 1 L L (cid:2) i =1 || l i − SOP ((cid:2)i α + ¯x i , R, t, s ) || 2 (8) i is the i-th image landmark, (cid:2)i ∈ R 3 ×M refers to the sub- where l matrix of the shape basis corresponding to the i th vertex, and i α + ¯x i ∈ R 3 is the vertex of the mean face shape such that (cid:2)¯x i are the coordinates of the i th vertex. The last term compares the edges detected on the image with those induced by the model due to occluding boundaries: E Edge ( α, R, t, s ) = (cid:2) 1 | β( α, R, t, s ) | i ∈ β( α,R,t,s ) −SOP ( (cid:2)i α + x i , R, t, s ) (cid:8) 2 (cid:8) l min l∈ (cid:9)(9) where (cid:9) is the set of edges, and β(α, R, t, s ) is the set of occluding boundary vertices. 2 The SOP model assumes that the variation in depth over the object is small relative to the mean distance from the camera to the object. Under this assumption, the projected 2D position of a 3D point does not depend on the distance of the point to the camera. 6 3.5. Quantitative and qualitative analysis Evaluating the performance of the presented algorithm is diffi- cult as we have really challenging data and also because we use a postnatal reconstruction as the estimate of the ground truth. The US scan is a noisy mesh that contains both face and non-face regions, distortions due to fetal movement, occlusions, and view, pose, age or expression changes with respect to other US scans of the same baby or to the postnatal reconstruction. As so many ex- ternal factors influence the reconstructions, it is difficult to find a metric that is not influenced by the above challenges. Thus, dif- ferent metrics to evaluate the performance of the method were computed, each one evaluating a different aspect of the algorithm. However, the quantitative analysis is not sufficient to asses the al- gorithm because it does not ensure that plausible fetal faces are obtained. For this reason, the quantitative analysis was comple- mented with visual evaluation to ensure that the obtained fetal faces were similar to the parts of the face visible in the US or to the post-natal reconstruction. In the following subsection, the dif- ferent metrics and comparisons performed to asses the algorithm will be explained. 3.5.1. Model to US error The Model to US (M2U) error is the Euclidean distance between the US scan vertices that were assigned as correspondences to model vertices of the reconstructed fetal face. This distance is the error that the NICP is trying to minimize. Because of the distance constraint applied, this error is limited to 10 mm and is subject to the uncertainty of being computed between points that may or may not be true correspondences. It provides information about how well the algorithm adjusts the model to the points of the 3D scan, but not about the quality of the reconstructions. 3.5.2. Multiple model reconstructions error Given the availability of several US scans per subject, we can evaluate the performance of the reconstruction algorithm by com- paring the reconstruction from different views. For each pair of re- constructions, two errors are quantified: the point-to-point error and the point-to-surface error. The point-to-point Multiple Model Reconstructions (MMR) error corresponds to the Euclidean dis- tance between the vertices of the two meshes. In contrast, the point-to-surface MMR error corresponds to the Euclidean distance between the vertices of one of the meshes to the nearest surface point in the other mesh. Low MMR errors indicate that the algo- rithm is behaving similarly even if the acquisition view of the US scan changed. More distant views with less points in common are expected to have larger errors. 3.5.3. Pre-natal vs post-natal We compare the pre-natal reconstruction with the post-natal reconstruction (obtained from 2D pictures, see Section 3.4 ) to vali- date the pre-natal estimates of the facial geometry. The same met- rics explained above, point-to-point and point-to surface errors will be computed, and we refer to them as Fetus to Newborn (F2N) errors. This comparison is challenging because of errors due to the pose change, noise, occlusions, facial expression and time differ- ence (growth of the baby). 4. Results In this section, we first show the fetal face reconstructions ob- tained from different US scans of the same baby. Then, we show the fetal face reconstructions error obtained using different param- eters of correspondence constrains. Finally, we compare the pre- natal and post-natal reconstructions of the same individual to eval- uate the performance of the reconstruction algorithm. A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 Fig. 3. Mean Model to US Error Map. Fig. 4. Reconstructions from different view angles and mean error map of the reconstructed meshes. The first row correspond to the US meshes of the same baby from three different views and the second row are the corresponding reconstructions. 4.1. US fitting 4.1.1. Model to US error Fig. 3 shows the mean error map between the US scans and the reconstructed faces, the model to US (M2U) error. At every vertex of the mean face, this error is obtained by averaging the Euclidean distances between its position in the reconstructed face and the correspondence found in the US scan (see Section 3.5.1 ). Note that the errors at each vertex are averaged across those ba- bies for which the correspondence (model to US) was found. Ver- tices in gray correspond to those that were never assigned as correspondences in the US scans. These not-assigned vertices are mainly located at the ears. On the other hand, the largest errors were found on the lateral regions (where the US scans are often noisy) and on the vertices corresponding to the landmarks (since they are manually set in the US). On average, the error per ver- tex was 0.39 mm, which reflects the high accuracy of the fitting. Note, however, that this does not necessarily imply a faithful re- construction since the M2U error does not evaluate whether cor- respondences are anatomically correct. 4.1.2. Multiple model reconstructions error The Multiple Model Reconstructions (MMR) error aims to com- pensate the shortage of M2U in evaluating the anatomical validity of the correspondences by analyzing how stable is the geometry of the estimates given different input scans from the same fetus. Before discussing the quantitative results, let us analyze qualita- tively one of the cases to better illustrate the reconstruction chal- lenges. Fig. 4 (top) shows three US meshes corresponding to dif- ferent viewing angles of the same fetal face. These different US meshes not only show different poses of the baby, but also dif- ferent expressions. Moreover, the smoothness of the surfaces and the occlusions/noise vary from one to another. The reconstructions obtained for each view are shown at the bottom of Fig. 4 . We can observe how the reconstructions adapt to the US information while being guided by the facial geometry en- coded in the BabyFM. Indeed, for the face regions visible in the US meshes, the reconstruction clearly resembles the US meshes while the model provides an informed guess (statistical estimate) for re- gions with occlusions and large missing areas. For example, even if the ears are not present in any of the US meshes, the recon- 7 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 Fig. 5. Mean Point Surface Error Map. It reports the average error per vertex of the M2U error. Fig. 6. Correspondence incidence. It indicates the percentage of meshes in which the vertex was selected as a correspondence in the US mesh. structions obtained have plausible ears. Also, the reconstructions are quite smooth even if the US meshes are rough (especially for View 1 and 2), and the nose and mouth are well captured (e.g. Reconstruction 2 reproduces the open mouth whereas the other two are maintained closed). Some artifacts can be observed in the eyes; whereas the US meshes present the eyes closed, they are reconstructed as if they were opened or with strange wrinkles. The reason is that the BabyFM has been built from newborn faces with (mostly) open eyes, thus the reconstructions tend to open the eyes. We quantitatively compared the reconstructions as described in 3.5.2 . Fig. 4 (g) shows the (point-to-point) error map for the ex- ample discussed above. Overlapping regions in the three US views present the smallest errors. For example, the nose and the upper lip region have an error between 0 and 1.5 mm, which means that our method is able to obtain similar reconstructions from differ- ent US scans from the same baby. In contrast, frequently missing regions in the US views present the largest error. We repeated this quantitative analysis for all the 29 fetuses and obtained an average point-to-surface MMR error of 3.08 ±1.33 mm; see Fig. 5 . When restricting to the central-face region (see Appendix Fig. A.12 ), the error reduces to 2.34 ± 0.71 mm. In Fig. 5 we see the average error map of all the reconstruction com- parisons performed (339 pairs in total). On the other hand, rep- resenting the vertices that were finally considered as correspon- dences in the US to estimate the fetal face gives us insight about the behaviour of the algorithm. Fig. 6 represents the incidence in percentage of each vertex being found as a correspondence in the US when considering all the 129 US scans. This representa- tion allows us to make some statements about the data and the behaviour of the algorithm. First, we can see that the region that is most present in the US scans is the nose region (between 80%- 95%) and the less present ones are the lateral regions (between 0%-15%). Second, the constraints applied (see Section 3.3 ) are able to remove most of the correspondences that would be assigned to the ears. These are wrong correspondences since the ears are not visible or present in any of the US scans used. Third, we observe that right side of the face of the babies was more often present in the US scans than the left side. As shown in Fig. 5 , the inner part of the face presents the least error. This together with the fact that this is the region most fre- quently present in the US meshes (see Fig. 6 ) indicates that the algorithm is adapting to the US information in a consistent man- ner. In contrast, we see how the lateral regions corresponding to the ears have the highest error since they are not present in the US meshes. Also, in these regions the model shape is probably be- ing adapted to some outliers introduced by the presence of noise, movement or occlusions. 4.1.3. Correspondence constraints experiments We evaluated the impact of different correspondence con- straints settings (normal constraint and neighborhood constraint in Section 3.3 ) on the MMR error. To this end, we first modified the angle acceptance threshold between surface normals from 0 to 180 degrees, for a fixed distance threshold of 2 mm. Then, we evalu- ated different distance thresholds from 1 to 10 mm for a fixed an- 8 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 Fig. 8. NICP vs NICP + Mesh Refinement. 4.2. Pre-natal vs post-natal reconstruction Fig. 9 shows three examples of pre-natal and post-natal recon- structions, the latter being obtained as described in Section 3.4 . As in previous examples, we observe that the pre-natal reconstruc- tions resemble the US meshes in those regions where the face is visible, while providing plausible facial features in the missing parts. As for the post-natal reconstructions, we see that they cap- ture well the facial features (nose, chin and chicks) and expression (mouth and eyes position). Comparing pre-natal and post-natal reconstructions is difficult since there is an age gap and a potential change of expression and pose that can influence the reconstruction. Fig. 10 shows the point- to-point error between the pre-natal and post-natal reconstruc- tions of the three previous examples. The error map in Fig. 10 (a) shows that the errors in regions where there is US face information are typically below 3 mm, whereas in the regions estimated by the model the errors increase. The error maps in Fig. 10 (b) and (c) il- lustrate how the expression affects the resemblance between pre- natal and post-natal reconstruction. For example, in Fig. 9 second case the mouth appears closed in the pre-natal data whereas in the post-natal frontal image is open; this makes the error map ( 10 (b)) to have large values around the chin and mouth, since they are dis- placed. In contrast, the baby in the third row of Fig. 9 appears with a similar expression in the pre-natal scan and the post-natal im- age, which favours having low error (see Fig. 10 (c)) in most of the central-face region (error below 2mm). The larger errors around the eyes, forehead and mouth are due to the lack of information from the US scan. The mean point-to-surface error obtained from the comparisons between pre-natal and post-natal of the 8 babies for which we have both reconstructions was 2.50 ± 1.15 mm (and 2.00 ±1 . 33 mm in the central-face). Fig. 11 shows that the average error per vertex between the pre-natal and post-natal reconstructions. 5. Discussion In this study, our aim was to obtain accurate fetal face recon- structions from 3D US images to allow assessing craniofacial mor- phology as early as possible. The proposed algorithm recovers ac- Fig. 7. Constraints Parameters. gle threshold of 35 degrees. To ensure that the parameters found can be established as global and not specific, for each US scan a leave-one-out cross-validation was performed, obtaining the same behaviour and minima. Fig. 7 shows the mean point-to-surface error obtained after comparing the reconstructions of the same individual from the different US views when varying the acceptance angle and the neighbours distance difference. It is observed that as larger angle or distance difference is allowed between the pairs of correspon- dences, the error between the reconstructions of the same subject increases, suggesting that we are adding outlier pairs as we are be- ing less restrictive. In contrast, if we are too restrictive with the an- gles or distance difference, the error also increase, suggesting that correspondences that add information of the face surface are be- ing rejected. Thus, for the reconstructions shown in this paper, we chose a surface normal of 35 degrees and a neighbors distance of 2 mm, which correspond to the minima found for each constraint evaluated. 4.1.4. Model-data mismatch in the nose size With respect to other facial features, the size of the nose in the US meshes appears relatively larger than expected for the face of a baby. This is not well captured by the BabyFM, built from newborns. We therefore applied the refinement step explained in Section 3.2 to better reconstruct the nasal protuberance and obtain smoother reconstructions. Fig. 8 shows the reconstructed faces with (right) and with- out (middle) the Laplace Beltrami mesh refinement. In the latter case, the average point-to-surface error is reduced from 3.08 mm to 3.01 mm, when considering the entire mesh, and from 2.34 ±1.39 mm to 2.28 ± 0.73 mm, when restricting it to the central-face. 9 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 Fig. 9. Pre-natal vs Post-natal reconstructions. Each row correspond to a different case, the two first columns are the pre-natal US and the reconstruction obtained, whereas the remaining columns are the post-natal frontal image and the reconstruction from multiple image fitting. Fig. 10. Pre-natal vs Post-natal color error maps. Each error map is the error between the pre-natal and the post-natal reconstruction of the three cases presented in Fig. 9 . curate 3D reconstructions and is robust to the viewing angle of the US scan. Both qualitative and quantitative assessment of the results are satisfactory. For a limited number of cases, we had post-natal photographs and we could further validate our pre-natal estimates of their facial geometry by comparing with the post-natal recon- struction. The reliability and accuracy of the reconstructions de- pend on the quality of the US as well as on the fetal pose and expression. It has been shown that it is reliable in the visible re- gions in the US scan and less accurate or less reliable in the re- gions were no information is available, as the algorithm is esti- mating the shape of these regions based on the statistics of the newborn faces encoded in the BabyFM. The more noise, or less vis- ible facial surface, is present in the US scans, the less accurate our reconstruction is. Our results suggest that an adequate adaptation of models built from newborns (such as BabyFM) can serve as statistical con- straints to guide the representation of fetal geometry, which is ex- pected to produce not only improvements in accuracy (given the 10 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 Fig. 11. Pre-natal vs Post-natal mean Error Map. the whole facial morphology of the babies under different condi- tions (large amounts of noise, missing parts or occasions), obtain- ing promising results. The facial shape reconstructed by the model would constitute the nearest newborn shape for the given fetal data. This paper is a step forward to a technique that has the po- tential to aid the pre-natal assessment and in-utero diagnosis of facial dysmorphology. Acknowledgements This work is partly supported by the eSCANFace project (PID2020-114083GB-I00) funded by the Spanish Ministry of Sci- ence and Innovation , and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver Na- tional Institute of Child Health and Human Development grant R42HD081712. A. Alomar was supported by AGAUR under the FI scholarship and G. Piella was supported by ICREA under the ICREA Academia programme. Appendix A. Appendix higher quality of the data used to construct the model), but also a way to relate the fetal face geometry to the one expected at birth. This would make it possible to use the available knowledge about the craniofacial anomalies in babies to address an earlier screening of craniofacial dysmorphologies already during fetal life. Compared to other fetal face reconstructions approaches such as [21] and [17] our method can handle noisy data, occlusions and missing parts, adapting well to the standard quality of clinical rou- tine imaging. However, our study has some limitations. First, the number of cases was modest and only a few had post-natal images. Sec- ond, there is a mistmatch between the age of the model (babies and newborns) and the data (fetuses). This makes the fetal re- constructed faces to look older. Also, some distortions might ap- pear in the eyes (which the model tends to open) and nose (which the model tends to make smaller). For the former, we included a mesh refinement step. For the latter, a possible future work will be adding more landmarks to the eyes and also to enlarge the train- ing data with more babies scanned with the eyes closed in order to capture this deformation mode as a shape vector of the BabyFM. Nevertheless, under the assumption that this mistmatch is pri- marily due to development of the face, the facial shape recon- structed by the model would constitute the nearest newborn shape for the given fetal data. This geometry difference becomes more evident when we try to measure the difference between the pre- natal and post-natal reconstructions. The time difference between the US and the photos used to get the 3D reconstructions was about 20 weeks, and might have a clear effect in the facial mor- phology of the baby. For this reason, applying age correction to the mesh extracted from the 3D fetal faces or to the BabyFM could help to more faithfully describe the fetal face. To compare pre-natal and post-natal reconstructions we need to consider also the difference in pose and expression between the fetal and the baby face capture. As we are not under a controlled environment, the same pose and expression cannot be ensured. While the use of a 3D model is expected to deal with pose dif- ferences, a fair comparison between pre-natal and post-natal data would require identity information to be decoupled from expres- sions variations. Possible lines of future work in this direction are building a bilinear model of identity and expression of babies or performing expression transfer between meshes. 6. Conclusions In this paper, we proposed an automatic fetal face reconstruc- tion algorithm from 3D US images using a newborns statistical shape model. It was demonstrated that our algorithm reconstructs Fig. A1. Central-face region. In green it can be seen the vertices considered as in- face region and in blue the vertices left out. 11 A. Alomar, A. Morales, K. Vellvé et al. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (2022) 106893 References [1] S. Liu, R. Narumi, N. Ikeda, O. Morita, J. Tasaki, Chemicalinduced craniofacial anomalies caused by disruption of neural crest cell development in a zebrafish model, Dev Dyn 249 (2020), doi: 10.1002/dvdy.179 . [2] A. Yoon, B. Pham, K. Dipple, Genetic screening in patients with craniofacial malformations, J Pediatr Genet 05 (2016), doi: 10.1055/s- 0036- 1592423 . [3] K.T.D.C.S.M.L.M. Porras, A.R. Rosenbaum, Machine learning for genetic syn- drome screening and risk stratification at the point-of-care in press (2021) . [4] B. Hallgrmsson, J.D. Aponte, D.C. Katz, J.J. Bannister, S.L. Riccardi, N. Ma- hasuwan, B.L. McInnes, T.M. Ferrara, D.M. Lipman, A .B. Neves, J.A .J. Spitz- macher, J.R. Larson, G.A. Bellus, A.M. Pham, E. Aboujaoude, T.A. Benke, K.C. Chatfield, S.M. Davis, E.R. Elias, R.W. Enzenauer, B.M. French, L.L. Pickler, J.T.C. Shieh, A. Slavotinek, A.R. Harrop, A.M. Innes, S.E. McCandless, E.A. Mc- Court, N.J.L. Meeks, N.R. Tartaglia, A.C.-H. Tsai, J.P.H. Wyse, J.A. Bernstein, P.A. Sanchez-Lara, N.D. Forkert, F.P. Bernier, R.A. Spritz, O.D. Klein, Auto- mated syndrome diagnosis by three-dimensional facial imaging, Genet Med 22 (2020), doi: 10.1038/s41436- 020- 0845- y . [5] E. Learned-Miller, Q. Lu, A. Paisley, P. Trainer, V. Blanz, K. Dedden, R. Miller, Detecting acromegaly: screening for disease with a morphable model 4191 LNCS - II (2006), doi: 10.1007/11866763 _ 61 . [6] L. Tu, A.R. Porras, A. Boyle, M.G. Linguraru, Analysis of 3D facial dysmorphology in genetic syndromes from unconstrained 2D photographs 11070 LNCS (2018), doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 030- 00928- 1 _ 40 . [7] L. Tu, A.R. Porras, A. Morales, D.A. Perez, G. Piella, F. Sukno, M.G. Linguraru, Three-dimensional face reconstruction from uncalibrated photographs: Appli- cation to early detection of genetic syndromes, in: H. Greenspan, R. Tanno, M. Erdt, T. Arbel, C. Baumgartner, A. Dalca, C.H. Sudre, W.M. Wells, K. Drech- sler, M.G. Linguraru, C. Oyarzun Laura, R. Shekhar, S. Wesarg, M.Á. González Ballester (Eds.), Uncertainty for Safe Utilization of Machine Learning in Medi- cal Imaging and Clinical Image-Based Procedures, Springer International Pub- lishing, Cham, 2019, pp. 182–189 . [8] J.-M. Levaillant, J.-P. Bault, B. Benoit, G. Couly, Normal and abnormal fetal face atlas, 2017, doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 319- 43769- 9 . [9] A.R. Davis, S.K. Horvath, P.M. Castaño, Trends in gestational age at time of sur- gical abortion for fetal aneuploidy and structural abnormalities 216 (3) (2017), doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2016.10.031 . [10] A.S.L. Mak, K.Y. Leung, Prenatal ultrasonography of craniofacial abnormalities, Ultrasonography 38 (1) (2019), doi: 10.14366/usg.18031 . [11] D. Rotten, J.M. Levaillant, Two- and three-dimensional sonographic assessment of the fetal face. 1. a systematic analysis of the normal face, Ultrasound Obstetr Gynecol 23 (2004), doi: 10.1002/uog.984 . [12] E. Merz, J. Abramovicz, K. Baba, H.G. Blaas, J. Deng, L. Gindes, W. Lee, L. Platt, D. Pretorius, R. Schild, P. Sladkevicius, I. Timor-Tritsch, 3D Imaging of the fetal face - Recommendationsfrom the international 3D focus group, Ultraschall in der Medizin 33 (2) (2012), doi: 10.1055/s- 0031- 1299378 . [13] V. Blanz, T. Vetter, A morphable model for the synthesis of, 3D Faces (1999), doi: 10.1145/311535.311556 . [14] A . Morales, A .R. Porras, L. Tu, M.G. Linguraru, G. Piella, F.M. Sukno, Spectral correspondence framework for building a 3D baby face, Model (2020), doi: 10. 1109/fg47880.2020.0 0 079 . [15] A.R. Porras, L. Tu, D. Tsering, E. Mantilla, A . Oh, A . Enquobahrie, R. Keat- ing, G.F. Rogers, M.G. Linguraru, Quantification of head shape from three-dimensional photography for presurgical and postsurgical evalua- tion of craniosynostosis, Plast Reconstr Surg 144 (2019), doi: 10.1097/PRS. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 06260 . [16] S. Feng, S.K. Zhou, S. Good, D. Comaniciu, Automatic fetal face detection from ultrasound volumes via learning 3D and 2D information, In IEEE Comput Soc Conf Comput Vision Pattern Recognit (2009) . [17] L. Bonacina, A. Froio, D. Conti, F. Marcolin, E. Vezzetti, Automatic 3D foetal face model extraction from ultrasonography through histogram processing, J Med Ultrasound 24 (4) (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.jmu.2016.08.003 . [18] H. Werner, J. Lopes, G. Tonni, E.A. Junior, Physicalmodel from 3D ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging scan data reconstruction of lumbosacral myelomeningocelein a fetus with chiari ii malformation, Child’s Nervous Syst 31 (4) (2015) 511–513 . [19] G.A . Menezes, E.A . Junior, J. Lopes, G.T. S. Belmonte, H. Werner, Prenatal di- agnosis and physicalmodel reconstruction of agnathia”otocephaly with limb deformities (absent ulna, ibula and digits) following maternalexposure to oxymetazoline in the irst trimester, J Obstetr Gynaecol Res 42 (8) (2016) 1016–1020 . [20] D. Speranza, D. Citro, F. Padula, B. Motyl, F. Marcolin, M. Calì, M. Martorelli, Ad- ditive manufacturing techniques for the reconstruction of 3D fetal faces, Appl Bionics Biomech 2017 (2017), doi: 10.1155/2017/9701762 . [21] A. Dall’Asta, S. Schievano, J.L. Bruse, G. Paramasivam, C.T. Kaihura, D. Dunaway, C.C. Lees, Quantitative analysis of fetal facial morphology using 3Dultrasound and statistical shape modeling: afeasibility study, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 217 (1) (2017), doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.02.007 . [22] A.E. Clark, B. Biffi, R. Sivera, A. Dall’asta, L. Fessey, T.L. Wong, G. Paramasivam, D. Dunaway, S. Schievano, C.C. Lees, Developing and testing an algorithm for automatic segmentation of the fetal face from three-dimensional ultrasound images: automatic segmentation of the fetal face, R Soc Open Sci 7 (11) (2020), doi: 10.1098/rsos.201342 . [23] B. Egger, W.A. Smith, A. Tewari, S. Wuhrer, M. Zollhoefer, T. Beeler, F. Bernard, T. Bolkart, A. Kortylewski, S. Romdhani, C. Theobalt, V. Blanz, T. Vetter, 3D Mor- phable face modelsa-Past, present, and future, ACM Trans Graph 39 (5) (2020), doi: 10.1145/3395208 . [24] P. Paysan, M. Lüthi, T. Albrecht, A. Lerch, B. Amberg, F. Santini, T. Vetter, Face reconstruction from skull shapes and physical attributes 5748 LNCS (2009), doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 642- 03798- 6 _ 24 . [25] A. Morales, G. Piella, F.M. Sukno, Survey on 3d face reconstruction from uncal- ibrated images, Comput Sci Rev 40 (2021), doi: 10.1016/j.cosrev.2021.10 040 0 . [26] J.C. Gower, Generalized procrustes analysis, Psychometrika 40 (1) (1975) 33–51 . [27] H. Zhu, B. Guo, K. Zou, Y. Li, K.-V. Yuen, L. Mihaylova, H. Leung, A review of point set registration: from pairwise registration to groupwise registration, Sensors 19 (2019), doi: 10.3390/s19051191 . [28] S. Rusinkiewicz, M. Levoy, Efficient variants of the ICP, Algorithm (2001) 145–152, doi: 10.1109/IM.2001.924423 . [29] H. Dai, N. Pears, W. Smith, C. Duncan, Statistical modeling of craniofacial shape and texture, Int J Comput Vis 128 (2) (2020) 547–571, doi: 10.1007/ s11263- 019- 01260- 7 . [30] A . Bas, W.A . Smith, T. Bolkart, S. Wuhrer, Fitting a 3D morphable model to edges: a comparison between hard and soft correspondences 10117 LNCS (2017), doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 319- 54427- 4 _ 28 . 12 