Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456Contents lists available at ScienceDirectArtificial Intelligencewww.elsevier.com/locate/artintRevenue monotonicity in deterministic, dominant-strategy combinatorialauctionsBaharak Rastegari∗, Anne Condon, Kevin Leyton-BrownDepartment of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, 2366 Main Mall, Vancouver, B.C., Canada, V6T 1Z4a r t i c l ei n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:Available online 15 September 2010Keywords:Mechanism designCombinatorial auctionsRevenue1. IntroductionIn combinatorial auctions using VCG, a seller can sometimes increase revenue bydropping bidders. In this paper we investigate the extent to which this counterintuitivephenomenon can also occur under other deterministic, dominant-strategy combinatorialauction mechanisms. Our main result is that such failures of “revenue monotonicity” canoccur under any such mechanism that is weakly maximal—meaning roughly that it choosesallocations that cannot be augmented to cause a losing bidder to win without hurtingwinning bidders—and that allows bidders to express arbitrary known single-mindedpreferences. We also give a set of other impossibility results as corollaries, concerningrevenue when the set of goods changes, false-name-proofness, and the core.1Crown Copyright © 2010 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.In combinatorial auctions (CAs), multiple goods are sold simultaneously and bidders are allowed to place bids on bun-dles, rather than just on individual goods. These auctions are interesting in settings where bidders have non-additive—andparticularly, superadditive—values for goods. (For an introduction, see Cramton et al. [12].) As with other applications ofmechanism design, the design of combinatorial auctions has tended to focus on the theoretical properties that a givendesign can guarantee.It is often desired for an auction mechanism to offer bidders the dominant strategy of truthfully revealing their privateinformation to the mechanism. (By the revelation principle, the assumption that bidders declare truthfully is without lossof generality; however, not all mechanisms offer dominant strategies.) Another useful property is revenue monotonicity, theguarantee that the seller’s revenue weakly increases as the number of bidders grows. Revenue monotonicity is importantbecause, without it the auctioneer has an incentive to disqualify bidders to increase revenue. Similarly, in such auctions abidder might find it profitable to place pseudonymous bids in order to reduce the seller’s revenue.We begin with a discussion of related work in the literature concerning dominant strategy truthfulness and revenuemonotonicity.1.1. Dominant strategy implementationConsiderable research has characterized the space of social choice functions that can be implemented in dominant strate-gies. A classic result of Roberts [26] showed that for bidders with unrestricted quasilinear valuations, affine maximizers are* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: baharak@cs.ubc.ca (B. Rastegari), condon@cs.ubc.ca (A. Condon), kevinlb@cs.ubc.ca (K. Leyton-Brown).1 We previously published a six-page preliminary version of our main result at a conference (Rastegari et al., 2007) [24]. Among other differences, thiswork considered a very limited version of our weak maximality condition that can be understood as requiring Pareto efficiency with respect to biddervaluations (i.e., ignoring payments).0004-3702/$ – see front matter Crown Copyright © 2010 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2010.08.005442B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456the only dominant-strategy-implementable social choice functions. Subsequent work has focused mainly on restricted classesof preferences [27,17,9,29,11].The VCG mechanism [31,10,16] has gained substantial attention in mechanism design literature because of its strongtheoretical properties. In particular, it offers dominant strategies and achieves efficiency. Indeed, no substantially different(technically, no non-Groves) mechanism can guarantee these properties for agents with general quasilinear valuations [15].VCG is computationally intractable,2 thus, there have been many attempts to design feasible dominant strategy truthfulmechanisms, even if for restricted classes of valuations. Archer and Tardos [2], Andelman and Mansour [1] and Mu’alem andNisan [19] studied the design of dominant strategy truthful mechanisms for combinatorial settings with single-parameteragents: agents whose private information can be encoded in a single positive real number. Babaioff et al. [6,7] studied CAdesign in single-value domains under the further assumption that each agent has the same value for all desired outcomes.Yokoo et al. [34,35,33] studied the design of dominant strategy truthful mechanisms for settings in which bidders maysubmit multiple bids using pseudonyms.1.2. Revenue monotonicityA main concern for auctioneers is an auction’s revenue. In this paper we focus on a particular revenue-related property:that a seller’s revenue from an auction is guaranteed weakly to increase as the number of bidders grows. Ausubel andMilgrom [4] dubbed this property bidder monotonicity. In order to emphasize that we are concerned with monotonicity ofrevenue—as compared to some other auction property—we prefer the term bidder revenue monotonicity. This can be con-trasted with e.g., good revenue monotonicity, the property that a seller’s revenue from an auction is guaranteed to weaklyincrease as the number of goods at the auction grows. We are primarily interested in the former property; thus, as ashorthand we abbreviate bidder revenue monotonicity simply as revenue monotonicity.It is easy to see that even VCG is not (bidder) revenue monotonic. Following an example due to Ausubel and Milgrom [5],consider an auction with three bidders and two goods for sale. Suppose that bidder 2 values the bundle of both goods at $2billion whereas bidder 1 and bidder 3 value the first and the second goods at $2 billion respectively. The VCG mechanismawards the goods to bidders 1 and 3 for the price of zero, yielding the seller zero revenue. However, in the absence ofeither bidder 1 or bidder 3, the auction would generate $2 billion in revenue.∗S(cid:2) V∗S∪{i} − V∗S(cid:3)∪{i} − V∗S(cid:3) , where VDifferent approaches have been proposed for understanding the extent of revenue non-monotonicity problems. One ap-proach has considered VCG’s performance under restricted valuation classes. Say that the combined valuation of bidders satisfiesbidder submodularity if and only if for any bidder i and any two sets of bidders S and S, it is the case that∗VS is the maximum social welfare achievable under S. Ausubel and Milgrom [4] showedthat if the combined valuation of bidders satisfies bidder submodularity then VCG is guaranteed to be revenue monotonic.Bidder submodularity is implied by the goods are substitutes condition (see, e.g., Ausubel and Milgrom [4] for a definition).However, in many application domains for which combinatorial auctions have been proposed, goods are not substitutesand bidders’ valuations exhibit complementarity. We therefore wish to investigate revenue monotonicity in domains wherearbitrary complementarity may exist. The simplest such domain is that of known single-minded bidders. Roughly speaking,a known single-minded bidder desires only a specific, known bundle, valuing that bundle and all its supersets at the sameamount and any other bundle at zero. Note that VCG is not revenue monotonic in this domain, as demonstrated in theabove example.with S ⊆ S(cid:3)(cid:3)Day and Milgrom [13] showed that, under the assumption that bidders follow a so-called “best-response truncationstrategy,” auctions that always select an outcome that is in the core with respect to declared valuations (so-called core-selecting auctions) are revenue monotonic when they select a core outcome that minimizes the seller’s revenue. (A precursorto this result also appeared in Ausubel and Milgrom [4].) Thus, the ascending proxy auction proposed by Ausubel andMilgrom [4] and the clock-proxy auction proposed by Ausubel et al. [3] are both revenue monotonic when agents playsuch a best-response strategy, but do not offer dominant strategies. Other mechanisms that have been proposed for use inpractice similarly lack dominant strategies (see, e.g., Bernheim and Whinston [8], Rassenti et al. [23] and Porter et al. [22]);we are not aware of any result in the literature that shows whether or not they are revenue monotonic.While revenue monotonicity is a feature of some auction mechanisms that have been deployed in practice, dominantstrategies are (perhaps surprisingly) uncommon. This fact underscores the practical importance of revenue properties likerevenue monotonicity, while pointing out that auctioneers are willing to sacrifice the strategic simplicity of dominant strate-gies.1.3. Overview of our workIn our work, we ask whether there exists a combinatorial auction mechanism that allows bidders to express arbitraryknown single-minded preferences and that is both dominant strategy truthful and revenue monotonic.If dominant strategy truthfulness and revenue monotonicity are the only conditions we require, it is easy to answerthe above question in the affirmative. Specifically, we can offer all goods as one indivisible bundle using a second-price2 Indeed, VCG has a host of other drawbacks too; see, e.g., Rothkopf [28].B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456443sealed-bid auction. However, this mechanism is unappealing, because it is combinatorial only in a degenerate sense. If wewant to require the mechanism to allocate the goods more sensibly than through a static pre-bundling, we must ask forsome further property. Very restrictively, we could require efficiency. In this work, we exchange efficiency for the muchmore inclusive notion of weak maximality. While efficiency requires the mechanism to choose an allocation that maximizessocial welfare, weak maximality requires that the mechanism choose an allocation that cannot be augmented to make somebidder better off, while making none worse off.Our main result roughly states that, when bidders are allowed to express arbitrary known single-minded preferences, nodeterministic, dominant-strategy combinatorial auction mechanism is revenue monotonic (we further assume “weak max-imality”, “consumer sovereignty” and “participation”; see Section 2). As noted above, none of the auctions in practical useoffer dominant strategies; in contrast, at least some are revenue monotonic (given behavioral assumptions). Our impos-sibility result helps to explain this phenomenon: if revenue monotonicity is an important property in practice, deployeddeterministic mechanisms will be unable to offer dominant strategies.3In Section 2 we define terminology for discussing combinatorial auction mechanisms and their properties. We presentour main impossibility result in Section 3. As corollaries, in Section 4 we prove similar impossibility results concerning theexistence of mechanisms that yield weakly increasing revenue as the set of goods (rather than bidders) increases, that arefalse-name-proof (i.e., that offer truthful dominant strategies when agents are able to submit multiple bids under differentidentities), and that choose outcomes guaranteed to belong to the core.2. PreliminariesIn this section we define terminology for discussing combinatorial auction mechanisms. To keep our presentation conciseand convey intuition, we provide informal and intuitive definitions and defer many technicalities to the appendix. For thesame purpose, we restrict our attention to the most restricted class of bidders that our result applies to, known single-mindedbidders. Note that an impossibility result, such as ours, becomes stronger under a more restricted setting.2.1. BiddersWe use N and G to denote the set of bidders present in an auction and the set of goods available for sale, respectively.Auction mechanisms generally work for any given set of bidders and goods. In this work we want to reason about chang-ing the setting to include or exclude bidders or goods. Therefore, we define a universal set of possible bidders N to be{1, 2, . . . , n}, and a universal set of goods G. In any auction, N ⊆ N and G ⊆ G.A valuation function describes the values that a bidder holds for subsets of the set of goods in G. Let v i denote bidder i’svaluation function.A valuation profile is an n-tuple v = (v 1, . . . , vn), where, for every participating bidder i, v i is a valuation function. Weadopt the convention that valuation profiles always have one entry for every potential bidder, regardless of the number ofbidders who participate in the auction. We use the symbol ∅ in such tuples as a placeholder for each non-participatingbidder (i.e., each bidder i /∈ N). Let v−i denote (v 1, . . . , v i−1, ∅, v i+1, . . . , vn). Note that if i /∈ N, then v = v−i .If asked to reveal her valuation, a bidder may not tell the truth. Denote the declared valuation function of a (par-ticipating) bidder i as (cid:2)v i . Let (cid:2)v be the declared valuation profile. Use the same notation to describe declared valuationprofiles as valuation profiles (e.g., all declared valuation profiles are n-tuples), and furthermore write (v i,(cid:2)v−i) to denote((cid:2)v 1, . . . ,(cid:2)v i−1, v i,(cid:2)v i+1, . . . ,(cid:2)vn).The class of unknown single-minded bidders, or simply single-minded bidders, was first introduced by Lehmann et al. [18].Informally, a participating bidder i is single-minded if there exists a particular bundle bi such that bidder i has a nonzerovaluation only for bundles that contain bi , and values all these bundles equally.Definition 1 (Single-minded bidder). Bidder i is single-minded if her valuation function is defined as(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:3)b(cid:3)iv i=(cid:3)ivi b0⊇ bi,otherwise,where vi > 0 and bi ⊆ G.A single-minded bidder i’s valuation can be characterized by two parameters: (cid:8)bi, vi(cid:9). Therefore, we use (cid:8)bi, vi(cid:9) and v iinterchangeably when a bidder is single-minded. We let (cid:8)(cid:2)bi, (cid:2)vi(cid:9) denote the declared valuation of single-minded bidder i.Known single-minded bidders, an even more restricted bidder model, was first introduced by Mu’alem and Nisan [19].is known to the mechanismA bidder i is known single-minded if she is single-minded and her bundle of interest bidesigner. The valuation of a known single-minded bidder i can be characterized by the single parameter vi , representingi’s valuation for any weak superset of bundle bi . Thus in this case we use v to denote a valuation profile for a group ofsingle-minded bidders, (cid:2)vi to denote the declared valuation of a participating bidder i, and (cid:2)v to denote a tuple consistingof declared valuations for participating bidders and ∅ symbols for non-participating bidders.3 In contrast, we show in [25] that there exist randomized, dominant-strategy mechanisms that are revenue monotonic.444B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–4562.2. Combinatorial auction mechanismsA combinatorial auction mechanism is capable of selling multiple goods simultaneously and allows bidders to place bidson bundles. In a known single-minded setting, the mechanism already knows the bundle each bidder is interested in. Thus,the bidders only have to express their value for their bundles of interest.A deterministic direct Combinatorial Auction (CA) mechanism (CA mechanism) M(ksm) defined for known single-mindedbidders over N and G produces an allocation of goods a = (a1((cid:2)v ), . . . , an((cid:2)v )) and a payment vector p = (p1((cid:2)v ), . . . , pn((cid:2)v ))for all G ⊆ G and N ⊆ N, given bidders’ declared valuation profile (cid:2)v . Note that for allocations to be feasible, the followingi ai((cid:2)v ) ⊆ G, and (ii) ai((cid:2)v ) ∩ a j((cid:2)v ) = ∅ if i (cid:12)= j. Furthermore, a CA mechanism does not allocate goods to,must hold: (i)and does not require a payment from, a bidder who is not participating in the auction. That is, ai((cid:2)v ) = ∅ and, pi((cid:2)v ) = 0 ifi /∈ N.(cid:6)We refer to (a, p) as the outcome of a CA mechanism. We refer to ai and pi as bidder i’s allocation and paymentfunctions respectively. Note that the allocation and payment functions may depend not only on (cid:2)v , but also on b. We denoteby AN,G the set of all possible ways of allocating goods. The seller may fail to allocate some or all of the goods. For anygiven allocation a ∈ AN,G , we denote by ai the set of goods that are allocated to bidder i under a. Whenever (cid:2)v can beunderstood from the context, we refer to ai((cid:2)v ) and pi((cid:2)v ) by ai and pi , respectively. If (cid:2)v i(ai) > 0, i.e. if ai ⊇ bi , we say thatbidder i “wins”. A losing bidder is a bidder who does not win. We assume that bidders have quasilinear utility functions;that is, bidder i’s utility for bundle ai is v i(ai) − pi .In the next section, we give intuitive and informal definitions for various properties that we would like to require of CAmechanisms. We provide references to formal definitions in Appendix A throughout the section.2.2.1. Dominant strategy truthfulnessIn mechanism design, it is especially desirable for a mechanism to give rise to dominant strategies, as then there isno need for bidders to reason about each others’ behavior in order to maximize their utilities. A CA mechanism M istruthful if bidders declare their true valuations to the mechanism in equilibrium. M is dominant strategy (DS) truthful if itis a dominant strategy for every bidder to reveal her true preferences (see Definition 19 in Appendix A). Observe that therevelation principle tells us that any social choice function that can be implemented in dominant strategies can also beimplemented truthfully in dominant strategies. This means that our conflation of dominant strategies with truth-telling iswithout loss of generality.2.2.2. ParticipationIt is natural to require that no bidder be made to pay unless she wins. A CA mechanism M satisfies participation if andonly if any bidder i for whom v i(ai) = 0 makes a zero payment to the mechanism (see Definition 20 in Appendix A). Unlikethe property of individual rationality (IR), which requires roughly that no bidder has to make a payment more than hervalue for the bundle she gets, participation does not constrain the payments of bidders who win. Participation is thereforea weaker condition than IR.2.2.3. EfficiencyAs discussed earlier, one of the most commonly-desired properties for an auction mechanism is efficiency. A CA mecha-nism is efficient if its chosen allocation in equilibrium maximizes the social welfare (see Definition 21 in Appendix A).2.2.4. Revenue monotonicityThe revenue of an auction mechanism is the sum over all the payments made by the bidders to the auctioneer. Anauction mechanism is revenue monotonic if and only if the auctioneer never collects more money when a bidder is dropped(see Definition 22 in Appendix A). Our goal in this paper is to investigate whether broad families of dominant-strategytruthful CA mechanisms satisfy revenue monotonicity.2.2.5. Weak maximalityConsider the set protocol, a simple mechanism that offers all goods as one indivisible bundle and uses the second pricesealed-bid auction to determine the winner and the payment. It is trivial to show that the set protocol is dominant-strategytruthful and satisfies participation. This mechanism is also revenue monotonic since dropping a bidder cannot cause thesecond-price bid to increase. However, the set protocol is a combinatorial auction only in a degenerate sense: it pre-bundlesall goods and treats them as a single indivisible good. If we are not happy with this solution, we need to require a propertythat rules out mechanisms like the set protocol.One popular option is efficiency (see Definition 21). As mentioned above, the only dominant-strategy truthful and effi-cient CA mechanisms are Groves mechanisms [15]. We have already seen that VCG fails revenue monotonicity; therefore,efficiency may be too strong a condition to require.We propose instead requiring weak maximality. Intuitively, weak maximality requires that the mechanism does not with-hold any good, or give it away to a bidder who does not value it, when it is sufficiently valued by a losing bidder. Weakmaximality is a less standard property than those we have discussed so far. Thus, we provide a more formal definition of ithere. For the fully formal treatment, see Definition 23 in Appendix A.B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456445Consider a truthful CA mechanism M(ksm) defined for known single-minded bidders, with set of bidders N, set of goodsG and set of (known) bundles b = (b1, . . . , bn). M is weakly maximal with respect to bidder i if and only if there exists a set ofnonnegative finite constants αN,G,b,i,g ,4 ∀g ∈ G, such that M(ksm) always chooses an allocation a where either:1. v i(ai) > 0; or(cid:3)2. for all allocations a(cid:3)i) > αN,G,b,i,awith v i(a(cid:3)i(cid:3), |ai(cid:3)| = 1, and aj(cid:3)(cid:3)i for all j (cid:12)= i, for some j, v j(a= a j \ aj) < v j(a j).(cid:3)Equivalently, we could write condition (1) as bi ⊆ ai , and condition (2) as b j ⊆ a j and b j (cid:12)⊆ aj .When a mechanism is weakly maximal with respect to bidder i, if i’s valuation for a single good g is at least αN,G,b,i,gand if g is not allocated to any other bidder who gets additional value for it, then i is awarded g. The quantities {αN,G,b,i,g |g ∈ G} can be thought of as bidder- and item-specific reserve prices. Observe that the set protocol does not satisfy weakmaximality with respect to any bidder, because the winning bidder may be given a good g that she does not value, evenwhen there exists another bidder i who values g and bids more than an arbitrary constant amount.Many interesting mechanisms are weakly maximal. (The definitions of the concepts that follow, along with the formalstatement of the claims and the proofs are given in Appendix B.) Efficient mechanisms, a broad class of affine-maximizingmechanisms, and all mechanisms that are strongly Pareto efficient with respect to bidders’ valuations are weakly maximal.Indeed, we can show that all these mechanisms satisfy an even stronger constraint, maximality. Note that requiring a weakerconstraint makes our impossibility result stronger.Our weak maximality property is related to the reasonableness condition of Nisan and Ronen [21], which says thatwhenever an item is desired by a single agent only, that agent must receive the item. If αN,G,b,i,g ’s are all set to zero,then weak maximality implies reasonableness. However, reasonableness does not imply weak maximality. Consider the casewhere there are exactly two bidders who desire an item. Reasonableness still holds even if that item is never allocated toeither of the agents, regardless of their declarations; however, such an allocation rule would violate weak maximality.2.2.6. Consumer sovereigntyA CA mechanism M satisfies consumer sovereignty if any bidder can win any bundle she desires by bidding at or above afinite amount that may depend on the declarations of the other bidders (see Definition 24 in Appendix A). Practical auctionsusually satisfy consumer sovereignty; see Feigenbaum et al. [14], upon which we base our definition.It is useful at this point to contrast consumer sovereignty with weak maximality. Consumer sovereignty implies that e.g.a bidder i surely wins the good she desires, g, by bidding at or above some finite amount. In contrast, weak maximalitydoes not imply that i necessarily wins g if she values it at or above the bidder-specific reserve price.2.3. Criticality for known single-minded biddersConsider a mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders. We say that the mechanism offers critical values to bidderi if two properties hold. First, bidder i wins whenever she bids more than some critical value that depends only on the otherbidders’ declarations, and loses whenever she bids less. Second, bidder i’s payment is equal to this critical value if she wins,and is zero otherwise. A mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders satisfies criticality if it offers critical valuesto all bidders.Definition 2 (Criticality). A CA mechanism M(ksm) defined for known single-minded bidders satisfies criticality if and only if∀b = (b1, b2, . . . , bn) ∈ (2G )n and ∀(cid:2)v−i , there exists a critical value cvb,i((cid:2)v−i) ∈ R ∪ {∞} where:• if (cid:2)vi > cvb,i((cid:2)v−i), i wins and pays cvb,i((cid:2)v−i);• if (cid:2)vi < cvb,i((cid:2)v−i), i loses and pays 0.Whenever b is understood from the context, we drop it from the subscript, writing cv i((cid:2)v−i). The following result can bestraightforwardly obtained from necessary and sufficient conditions for dominant-strategy truthfulness (see, e.g., Mu’alemand Nisan [19] and Nisan [20]).Theorem 3. (Following Lehmann [18] and Mu’alem and Nisan [19].) Any CA mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders thatsatisfies dominant-strategy truthfulness and participation also satisfies criticality.The following corollary, which immediately follows from Theorem 3 and consumer sovereignty, is used in the proof ofour main theorem.4 The reader may be surprised that these constants depend on N, G and b as well as i and g. A full explanation requires the formal details developedin Appendix A. Intuitively, the constants are allowed to vary for different sets of participating bidders N ∈ N, available goods G ∈ G, and known bundlesb ∈ (2G )n .446B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456Fig. 1. A high-level illustration of Theorem 5: Given (cid:8){g1}, v1(cid:9), (cid:8){g1, g2}, v2(cid:9) and (cid:8){g3}, v3(cid:9)—vi ’s as constructed in the proof of the theorem—(1) Bidders 1and 3 win bundle {g1} and bundle {g2} respectively and each pay more than a predefined constant amount, (2) bidder 3 wins bundle {g2} and pays morethan the sum of the payments in part (1).Fig. 2. Illustration of dependencies between the constructed values in the proof of Theorem 5: For example, the edge from v ∗on v ∗1 ; the lack of edges to v ∗1 shows that v ∗1 can be set freely.1 to v3 shows that v3 dependsCorollary 4. Any CA mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders that satisfies dominant-strategy truthfulness, participation,and consumer sovereignty offers finite critical values to all bidders.3. Impossibility of revenue monotonicityIn this section we turn to our main claim, that no CA mechanism can be revenue monotonic if it satisfies our desiredproperties of dominant-strategy truthfulness, participation, consumer sovereignty and weak maximality with respect to atleast two bidders. We begin by giving an example of how an existing inefficient mechanism fails revenue monotonicity, andthen prove the general result.3.1. An example with an inefficient mechanismIn the introduction we gave a well-known example showing that VCG does not satisfy revenue monotonicity. Now weshow—we believe, for the first time—that another widely-studied mechanism also fails revenue monotonicity, even thoughit does not have an efficient allocation rule. The existence of such an example is not surprising given our impossibilitytheorem; however, it offers intuition for what follows.Lehmann et al. [18] introduced an inefficient, dominant-strategy truthful, direct CA mechanism for single-minded bidders.Naming it after its authors, we call the mechanism LOS. Like VCG, LOS satisfies participation and consumer sovereignty. LOSis also strongly Pareto efficient with respect to bidders’ valuations (see Definition 28 in Appendix A), and so satisfies weakmaximality with respect to all bidders.Let ppgi = vi/|bi|, bidder i’s declared price per good. LOS ranks bids in a list L in decreasing order of ppg, and thengreedily allocates bids starting from the top of L. Thus, each bidder i’s bid is granted if bi does not conflict with anypreviously allocated bids. If i’s bid is allocated she is made to pay |bi| ∗ vinext/|binext|, where inext is the first bidder followingi in L whose bid was denied but would have been allocated if i’s bid were not present. Bidder i pays zero if she does notwin or if there is no bidder inext.Consider three bidders {1, 2, 3} and two goods {g1, g2}. Let the true valuations of bidder 1, 2 and 3 be (cid:8){g1}, v1(cid:9),(cid:8){g1, g2}, v2(cid:9) and (cid:8){g2}, v3(cid:9), respectively. Now consider the following conditions on the bidders’ valuations:(1) v1 > v3 > v2/2;(2) v2 > 0.It is possible to assign values to the vi ’s in a way that satisfies both conditions: e.g., v1 = 5, v2 = 4 and v3 = 3.We will demonstrate that the auctioneer’s revenue under LOS can be increased by dropping a bidder whenever thebidders and their valuations are as described above. From Condition 1, ppg1 > ppg3 > ppg2 and therefore bidders 1 and 3win. Each pays zero, so the total revenue is zero. To see this, note that the next bidder in the list after bidder 1 whose bidconflicts with b1 is bidder 2. However, bidder 2 would not win even if bidder 1 were not present, since b2 also conflictswith b3. Therefore bidder 1 pays zero. The same is true for bidder 3, and thus she also pays zero. If bidder 1 is dropped,bidder 3 wins and must pay ppg2 = v2/2. Since v2 > 0 (Condition 2), this payment is more than zero and so revenuemonotonicity fails.B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456447Fig. 3. Sketch of the proof of Theorem 5: Part 1.Fig. 4. Sketch of the proof of Theorem 5: Part 2.3.2. Impossibility theoremWe are now ready to prove our main result.Theorem 5. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M(ksm) be a CA mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders that offers dominantstrategies to the bidders and satisfies participation,5 consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality with respect to at least two bidders.Then M(ksm) is not revenue monotonic.Proof. Without loss of generality (by the revelation principle) assume that M(ksm) is dominant-strategy truthful. We willfurther assume that bidders follow their dominant strategies and bid truthfully. Since |N| (cid:2) 3, there are at least threebidders; let us name the first three 1, 2, and 3. (For notational simplicity in what follows, we will write the proof as though|N| = 3. If in fact |N| > 3 our argument would not change, except that all valuation profiles would include extra ∅ entries.)Assume without loss of generality that M(ksm) is weakly maximal with respect to bidders 1 and 3. Since |G| (cid:2) 2, thereare at least two goods; let us name the first two g1 and g2. Let the bundles valued by bidders 1, 2, and 3 be b1 = {g1},b2 = {g1, g2} and b3 = {g2} respectively.The five properties in which we are interested (DS truthfulness, participation, revenue monotonicity, weak maximality,and consumer sovereignty) are all universally quantified over N ⊆ N and G ⊆ G (see Definitions 19, 20, 22, 23, and 24in Appendix A). Thus, to prove the theorem, it is enough to demonstrate that no mechanism satisfies all of these propertiesfor some given N and G. Specifically, we consider N = {1, 2, 3} and G = {g1, g2}.5 In the case of single-parameter domains—which includes known single-minded bidders—it is possible to satisfy participation for free. That is, the spaceof social choice functions that are implementable in dominant strategies is the same with or without adding a participation constraint. This is mainlybecause each bidder has to pay either of the two specific amounts: one if she wins and one if she loses. If we “normalize” the payment function andunconditionally pay each bidder the losing amount—which could be negative—then we achieve a dominant-strategy mechanism that satisfies participa-tion. However, there are revenue implications to these unconditional payments that vary as the number of bidders in the auction varies. Therefore, wenevertheless state the participation condition explicitly.448B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456We now show how to construct valuations for the three bidders. First pick an arbitrary positive constant k, and then+ k. Next pick an arbitrary positive constant ε, and then pick an= α{1,2,3},G,b,3,g2define v ∗= α{1,2,3},G,b,1,g11arbitrary value for v2 that satisfies(cid:3)+ ε∅, ∅, vv2 > cv 2+ v+ k and v ∗3(cid:4).∗3∗1Finally, pick values for v1 and v3 that satisfy(cid:3)∅, v2, v(cid:3)∗1 , v2, ∅v, cv 1(∅, v2, ∅), v, cv 3(∅, v2, ∅), v(cid:7)cv 1(cid:7)cv 3v3 > maxv1 > max∗3(cid:4)(cid:4)and(cid:8)(cid:8),.∗1∗3By Corollary 4 the above critical values are all finite. Dependencies between v ∗3 , v2, v1, and v3 are shown in Fig. 2,illustrating the fact that it is possible to pick values for these variables that satisfy all our constraints by following theordering given.1 , v ∗The rest of the proof is divided into two parts. In Part 1 we consider N = {1, 2, 3} and construct an expression for theauction’s revenue. In Part 2 we consider N = {2, 3} and show that more revenue is obtained than in Part 1. Sketches of thearguments in each of these parts are given in Figs. 3 and 4 respectively. Fig. 1 gives a high-level illustration of the proof.Part 1: Since v1 > cv 1(∅, v2, v ∗construction, bidder 3 is the only bidder whose bundle does not overlap with b1, and v ∗maximality bidder 3 would also win and, by criticality,3 then bidder 1 would win (by criticality). By3 > α{1,2,3},G,b,3,g2 ; thus, by weak3 ) (by construction), if bidder 3 were to bid v ∗(cid:3)∗3(cid:4).see (1) in Fig. 31 , v2, ∅) we can also conclude thatcv 3(v1, v2, ∅) (cid:3) vSymmetrically, from v3 > cv 3(v ∗∗cv 1(∅, v2, v3) (cid:3) v1 .1 and v3 > v ∗By construction, v1 > v ∗3 . Then, using inequalities (1) and (2) and by criticality, bidders 1 and 3 win (see(2) in Fig. 3). By participation, since bidder 2 loses she must pay zero. Therefore the revenue of the auction, by criticality, isR = cv 1(∅, v2, v3) + cv 3(v1, v2, ∅) (cid:3) v ∗Part 2: If bidder 1 is not present, then only bidders 2 and 3 compete. Since v3 > cv 3(∅, v2, ∅), by criticality, bidder 3wins and pays cv 3(∅, v2, ∅) (see (3) in Fig. 4). Since b2 and b3 overlap, bidder 2 loses and by participation pays zero. Therevenue of the auction is therefore R−1 = cv 3(∅, v2, ∅). By construction, v2 > cv 2(∅, ∅, v ∗+ε). Thus if bidder 3 wereto bid v ∗+ v ∗+ ε then bidder 2 would win (by criticality) and so bidder 3 would lose. This tells us (again by criticality)31that cv 3(∅, v2, ∅) (cid:2) v ∗(cid:2) R. Thus,M(ksm) is not revenue monotonic. (cid:2)+ ε (see (4) in Fig. 4). Therefore, R−1 = cv 3(∅, v2, ∅) (cid:2) v ∗+ ε > v ∗1+ v ∗3 .+ v ∗3+ v ∗3+ v ∗3+v ∗3(2)(1)1111One might have imagined that weak maximality would increase an auction mechanism’s revenue by avoiding “leavingmoney on the table,” augmenting allocations to award available goods to the bidders who value them. Instead, we haveshown above that any dominant-strategy truthful combinatorial auction mechanism that satisfies weak maximality with re-spect to at least two bidders—along with some more standard conditions—can sometimes collect no more than a predefinedconstant amount of revenue despite competition between bidders. That is, given the constructed valuations, the payments ofbidders 1 and 3 are bounded from above by an amount that does not depend on bidder 2’s losing bid; bidder 2 effectivelyfails to offer competition to bidders 1 and 3, who also offer each other no competition as they bid on separate bundles. Onthe other hand, when bidder 1 is dropped then bidders 2 and 3 do compete. Although bidder 3 still wins, she pays morethan before and more than the sum of the payments in the three-bidder case. The mechanism can thus achieve arbitrarilyhigher revenue in the two-bidder case than in the three-bidder case, since ε and k can be set to be arbitrarily large andarbitrarily small, respectively.We have mentioned that an impossibility result becomes stronger as the set of mechanisms it describes becomes morerestricted, hence our focus on known single-minded bidders. However, our claim is only really true if we can state ourimpossibility theorem for mechanisms that are not restricted to known single-minded bidders. It may seem intuitive thatsuch a result would be very close to, and somewhat straightforward to derive from, what we have already shown. While thisis indeed the case, the general statement of our result requires considerable formal setup beyond what we have providedso far. We formally state our result for the general case and prove it in Appendix C (Theorem 29). The extension of alltheorems and corollaries in Section 4 to the same general case are also given in the same appendix.4. Related impossibility resultsOur main impossibility result straightforwardly implies several other impossibility results. Here we demonstrate thatarguments of the same form suffice to show that it is impossible to achieve false-name-proofness and monotonicity in theset of goods rather than the set of bidders, and to guarantee that an auction’s outcome belongs to the core.B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–4564494.1. False-name-proofnessFalse-name (pseudonymous) bidding has been studied extensively (e.g., Yokoo [32] and Yokoo et al. [34,35]). This workis concerned with auctions in which a bidder may submit multiple bids using pseudonyms. An auction mechanism is saidto be false-name-proof if truth-telling without using false-name bids is a dominant strategy for each bidder. Yokoo et al.[34] proved that there does not exist any combinatorial auction mechanism that is false-name-proof and efficient. Observethat this is a somewhat narrow result, because—as discussed earlier—only Groves mechanisms are both dominant-strategytruthful and efficient [15].There is a connection between false-name-proofness and revenue monotonicity. From the seller’s perspective, false-namebidding is the same as having more bidders in the auction. If an auction is not revenue monotonic, more bidders canmean less revenue. Our results are therefore relevant to research on false-name bidding (Todo et al. [30] indeed recentlyinvestigated this connection). For technical reasons, we have to make minor changes to our formal model to capture false-name bidding (e.g., we have assumed that mechanisms know bidders’ identities.) We can then prove the following corollarywhich generalizes the result of Yokoo et al. [34] by replacing their requirement of efficiency with the much weaker criterionof weak maximality. Recall that all efficient mechanisms are weakly maximal with respect to all bidders, but there existother mechanisms that are inefficient and still weakly maximal.Corollary 6. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M(ksm) be a CA mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders that offers dominantstrategies to the bidders, and that satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality with respect to at least twobidders. Then M(ksm) is not false-name-proof.Proof. Given the valuations constructed in the proof of Theorem 5, bidder 3 gains by pseudonymously bidding also asbidder 1, and so truth telling is not a dominant strategy for bidder 3. (cid:2)4.2. Monotonicity in the set of goodsHere we show that we can also obtain the same impossibility results as in Theorem 5 when we define revenue mono-tonicity over the set of goods instead of over the set of bidders. This result may be more intuitive than our first result, as itrelies on the fact that adding goods to an auction can reduce the level of competition between the bidders.An auction mechanism is good revenue monotonic if and only if the auctioneer never collects more money by dropping agood (see Definition 31 in Appendix C).Corollary 7. Let |G| (cid:2) 3 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M(ksm) be a CA mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders that offers dominantstrategies to the bidders and satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality with respect to at least two bidders.Then M(ksm) is not good revenue monotonic.Proof. The claim follows from the proof of Theorem 5 with some minor modifications: (i) add an extra good g3 to bidder1’s bundle b1; (ii) instead of dropping bidder 1 in Part 2, drop g3—then bidder 1’s valuation for all available bundlesis 0. (cid:2)4.3. Outcomes in the coreCoalitional game theory focuses on groups of players and the utility they can achieve together. It is relatively standard(see, e.g., Ausubel and Milgrom [4]; Day and Milgrom [13]) to describe efficient auction mechanisms as coalitional games.This theory can be useful for discussing what happens to an auction’s revenue when bidders are added or removed.4.3.1. Modeling efficient mechanisms as coalitional gamesA transferable utility (TU) coalitional game is defined by a set of players N p and a characteristic function w that mapseach coalition of players S to the coalition’s value, w(S). The grand coalition is the coalition of all players. An imputationis a payoff profile in which each player receives a nonnegative payoff and the sum of the payoffs does not exceed thegrand coalition’s value.6 An efficient combinatorial auction naturally defines a TU coalitional game. Define N p as the set ofparticipating bidders, N, plus the seller whom we denote by 0. An efficient auction game is then defined as follows.Definition 8 (Efficient auction game). For any coalition S ⊆ N p , define the coalition’s value as(cid:5)(cid:9)w(S) =maxa∈AS,G0i∈S\{0} v i(ai) 0 ∈ S,0 /∈ S.6 In the literature, it is usually also required that imputations be efficient. Here, we slightly modified the common definition so that we can later extendit to inefficient mechanisms.450B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456Intuitively, in an efficient auction game, the value of a coalition consisting of any set of players S including the selleris the maximum social welfare achievable under S. When the seller does not belong to a coalition, the coalition’s value iszero.In an auction, the mechanism picks a specific imputation by imposing the chosen allocation and payments. We call thisauction’s imputation. In an auction game, define the payoff of the seller under the auction’s imputation as the auction’si∈N pi . Define bidder i’s payoff as her utility from the auction, πi = ui = v i − pi . Observe that in anrevenue, π0 = R =(cid:9)efficient auction game(cid:9)πi = w(N p).i∈N pDefinition 9 (Core in TU coalitional game). An imputation π is in the core of a TU coalitional game if and only if no subset ofplayers can achieve higher payoff:(cid:10)∀S ⊆ N p,π j (cid:2) w(S).j∈SIf an auction’s imputation is in the core, no coalition has an incentive to deviate from it. (Observe that all coalitionsthat do not involve the seller have zero value; thus, a deviating coalition would always involve the seller and a subset ofthe bidders.) Note that we allow for the possibility that the grand coalition (in addition to smaller coalitions) would makesuch a deviation. We say that the outcome of an auction mechanism is in the core if the auction’s imputation is in thecore. Recall that any efficient mechanism is maximal with respect to all bidders. Our impossibility result then implies thefollowing corollary.Corollary 10. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M(ksm) be a CA mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders that offers dominantstrategies to the bidders, and that satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and efficiency. Then, there exists a valuation profile forwhich the auction’s imputation does not belong to the core.This result follows as a special case of Corollary 13, so we omit the proof.4.3.2. Modeling inefficient mechanisms as coalitional gamesThe literature on modeling auctions as coalitional games focuses on efficient mechanisms. This makes sense under theassumption that any deviating coalition can achieve a social welfare maximizing outcome. Recall that in an auction game,the payoff of the seller is the auction’s revenue and the payoff of each bidder is her utility. If one attempts to describean inefficient auction mechanism as a TU game following Definition 8, the outcome of the auction is not guaranteed tobe in the core. This is because the sum of the payoffs may not add up to the grand coalition’s value. In other words, ifthe auction mechanism chooses an inefficient outcome then the grand coalition has an incentive to deviate to an efficientoutcome. However, if a seller elects to use an inefficient mechanism, it is inconsistent to then imagine all bidders and theseller jointly deviating to an efficient allocation. The use of an inefficient mechanism can nevertheless make sense, e.g.,because regulatory or computational constraints may limit the set of outcomes that can be achieved. Therefore, here weaim to model inefficient mechanisms as coalitional games. Specifically, we discuss three alternate coalitional game modelsof the auction game, none of which obviously dominates the others.In the first alternative, which makes minimal changes to Definition 8, we assume that players can reach the efficientallocation for all but the grand coalition. (That is, we assume that the coalition’s value for all coalitions except the grandcoalition is as stated in Definition 8.)In what follows, let v S denote the valuation profile of the bidders in S. That is, v S is the restriction of v to the biddersin S and is derived from v by replacing the valuation of any bidder i /∈ S by ∅.Definition 11 (Inefficient auction game (first alternative)). For any coalition S ⊆ N p , define the coalition’s value as(cid:9)⎧⎨i∈S\{0} v i(ai(v S ))(cid:9)S = N p,w(S) =⎩maxa∈AS,G0i∈S\{0} v i(ai) 0 ∈ S and S (cid:12)= N p,0 /∈ S.In the second alternative, we assume that players have to obey the mechanism’s allocation choice under all coalitions,rather than only under the grand coalition.Definition 12 (Inefficient auction game (second alternative)). For any coalition S ⊆ N p , define the coalition’s value as(cid:5) (cid:9)w(S) =0i∈S\{0} v i(ai(v S )) 0 ∈ S,0 /∈ S.The second alternative may seem more plausible than the first one. We do not need to choose between them, however,as both lead to the following impossibility result.B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456451Corollary 13. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M(ksm) be a CA mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders that offers dominantstrategies to the bidders and satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality with respect to at least two bidders.Define the auction game as in Definition 11 or Definition 12. Then, there exists a valuation profile for which the auction’s imputationdoes not belong to the core.Proof. The proof can be derived from the proof of Theorem 5 by slight modifications. First, construct valuations as in the+ v ∗proof of Theorem 5, but now choose v2 to satisfy the constraint v2 > max(cv 2(∅, ∅, v ∗3 ).Then, notice that in the auction game defined as in either of Definitions 11 or 12, the auctioneer must award bidder 2her desired bundle when she is the only present bidder, as by construction v2 > cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅). Therefore, w({2, 0}) = v2.Furthermore, the coalition of the seller and bidder 2 has an incentive to deviate from the grand coalition since w({2, 0}) =v2 > v ∗(cid:3)2 < v2,making both himself and bidder 2 better off. (cid:2)(cid:2) u2 + R. In other words, the seller can sell the bundle to bidder 2 for the price of p+ ε), cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅), v ∗2, v ∗+ v ∗3+ v ∗33 < p+ v ∗1111(cid:3)In the coalitional game formulations that we have considered so far, the mechanism only dictates its choice of allocationto some or all of the coalitions—specifically, to the grand coalition in Definition 11 and to all coalitions in Definition 12. Wemay want to assume that the mechanism imposes not only its choice of allocation, but also its choice of payments, thus,disallowing side payments between bidders. This motivates our third coalitional game model, which describes an inefficientauction game as a coalitional game with nontransferable utility (NTU).Formally, an NTU coalitional game is defined by a set of players N p and a characteristic function w that maps eachcoalition of players S to a set of real-valued vectors describing different sets of payoffs achievable by the members.Definition 14 (Core in an NTU coalitional game). A payoff vector π ∈ w(N p) is in the core of an NTU coalitional game if andonly if ∀S ⊆ N p , ¬∃x ∈ w(S) such that ∀i ∈ S, πi (cid:3) xi and ∃ j ∈ S, π j < x j .Definition 15 (Inefficient auction game (third alternative)). Let the characteristic function w map each coalition S ⊆ N p to asingle real-valued vector in which each player’s payoff is exactly her utility under the mechanism’s chosen allocation andtaking into account her payment to the mechanism, when the set of participating bidders is S \ {0}.For known single-minded bidders, all mechanisms that involve only a single bidder i, that satisfy participation, and thatoffer dominant strategies can be understood as offering i her desired bundle at a fixed price, cv i(∅, . . . , ∅). The followingresult can be understood as showing that any mechanism satisfying our conditions either already sets cv i(∅, . . . , ∅) in sucha way that both the seller and i can gain when all other bidders are excluded from the mechanism, or can be modified todo so. Intuitively, our counterexample cannot be used to show that a given (unmodified) mechanism always suffers fromthis problem because, while i is always better off when the other bidders are dropped, the seller could be worse off ifcv i(∅, . . . , ∅) is set too low.Corollary 16. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M(ksm) be a CA mechanism defined for known single-minded bidders that offers dominantstrategies to the bidders and satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality with respect to at least two bidders.Then there exists a CA mechanism Mthat allows bidders to express the same preferences as in M(ksm) and that(cid:3)1. has the same allocation and payment functions as M(ksm), except that it may have a different cv i(∅, . . . , ∅) for some (single)i ∈ N;2. satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality with respect to at least two bidders; and3. chooses an outcome that is not guaranteed to belong to the core.Proof. The result follows from the proof of Theorem 5 by slight modification. Consider the three-bidder two-good setting inthe proof of Theorem 5. To emphasize that M(ksm) may already choose outcomes that do not belong to the core, our proofconsiders two cases.Case 1. cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅) > α{1,2,3},G,b,1,g1+ α{1,2,3},G,b,3,g3 .Pick an arbitrary positive k < 12 (cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅) − α{1,2,3},G,b,1,g1− α{1,2,3},G,b,3,g3 ). Construct valuations as in the proofof Theorem 5, given the chosen k, but now choose v2 to satisfy the constraint v2 > max(cv 2(∅, ∅, v ∗+ε), cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅), v ∗3 ). By Corollary 4, M(ksm)’s revenue when only bidder 2 participates is R2 = cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅) >v ∗(cid:2) R. The utility of bidder 2 in this case—i.e., when only bidder 2 participates—is u2 = v2 − cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅) > 0,1which is strictly greater than bidder 2’s utility when all three bidders participate. Thus, the outcome chosen by M(ksm) doesnot belong to the core; let M(cid:3) = M(ksm).+ v ∗3+ v ∗3+ v ∗11Case 2. cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅) (cid:3) α{1,2,3},G,b,1,g1+ α{1,2,3},G,b,3,g3 .452B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456(cid:3)Construct Mto be the same as M(ksm), except choose cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅) > α{1,2,3},G,b,1,g1+ α{1,2,3},G,b,3,g3 . Observe that thischange preserves dominant strategies (this property is unaffected by the specific value taken by cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅)), participation(bidder 2 pays nothing if she loses), consumer sovereignty (cv 2(∅, ∅, ∅) is finite), and weak maximality with respect tobidders 1 and 3 (nothing changes for these bidders). Then, the proof follows from the argument in Case 1. (cid:2)Earlier, when we modeled inefficient auctions as TU games, we assumed that bidder 2 and the seller could divide gainsbetween them, meaning that the pair were always better off forming a coalition. Under the NTU model, that division mustbe described explicitly through the auction’s payment rule. The proof of Corollary 16 shows that such a division can alwaysbe accomplished by an appropriate choice of cv i(∅, . . . , ∅).5. Conclusions and future workIn this work, we investigated whether there exists any deterministic, dominant-strategy truthful CA mechanism thatsatisfies participation, consumer sovereignty and weak maximality with respect to at least two bidders and that is rev-enue monotonic. We showed that no such mechanism exists, whenever bidders are allowed to express arbitrary knownsingle-minded preferences; as corollaries, we were able to show similar results concerning mechanisms that yield weaklydecreasing revenue when goods are dropped and false-name-proof mechanisms. Also, we investigated the relationship be-tween a mechanism being revenue monotonic and the mechanism yielding an outcome that belongs to the core. Morespecifically, we showed that for any mechanism that satisfies our desired properties, the outcome of the mechanism is notguaranteed to belong to the core.In future work, we are interested in investigating the probability that such revenue monotonicity failures occur in practi-cal auctions. It is also interesting to ask what dominant-strategy truthful CA mechanism has all the properties we demandedbefore and has the minimum probability of violating revenue monotonicity. Finally, we hope to gain a better understandingof the existence or nonexistence of revenue monotonic mechanisms that satisfy only a subset of our desired properties.Appendix A. Formal definitionsIn this section we formally define the concepts introduced in Section 2. Let valuation function vG,i for bidder i ∈ N mapto the nonnegative reals. For every G ⊂ G let valuation function v G,i be the restriction of vG,i to 2G . Whenever G isG2understood, we drop it from the subscript.Let V denote the universal set of all possible valuation profiles. Let V N,G denote a set of valuation profiles for the setof participating bidders N and the set of goods for sale G. Let VN,G denote the set of all valuation profiles given a set ofparticipating bidders N and a set of goods for sale G; that is, the set of all valuation profiles v G for which v i = ∅ if andonly if i /∈ N.In a particular auction, bidders’ valuation functions may be drawn from some restricted set. Let V N,G ⊆ VN,G denote asubspace of the universal set of valuation profiles for the set of participating bidders N and the set of goods for sale G. LetV N,G,i denote the set {v i | (v 1, . . . , v i, . . . , vn) ∈ V N,G }. Let VN,G denote the universal set of valuation profile subspaces, thatis VN,G = {V N,G | N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G, V N,G ⊆ VN,G }. Let V denote a set of valuation profile subspaces with at least one membercorresponding any N ⊆ N and G ⊆ G. That is, V ⊆ VN,G and ∃V N,G ∈ V, ∀N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G. Note that there could be more thanone subspace corresponding to a fixed N and a fixed G in V .a participating bidder, let VConsider the case of known single-minded bidders. Let N ⊆ N and G ⊆ G be fixed. Let b = (b1, b2, . . . , bn) ∈ (2G )n. If i is(b)N,G,i be the set of all possible single-minded valuation functions, taken over all possible choices(b)(b)of vi , and otherwise let VN,G is simply the space of valuation profilesN,G,iin which participating bidders are all single-minded and each participating bidder i values bundle bi . Let V (ksm) denote theset of valuation profile subspaces for known single-minded bidders, V (ksm) = {V| N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G, b ∈ (2G )n}.(b)N,G,n. Then, V= ∅. Let V× · · · × V(b)N,G,1(b)N,G= V(b)N,GA.1. CA mechanismsWe first formally define a combinatorial auction mechanism. Observe that our definition requires a mechanism to defineallocations and payments for all possible sets of bidders, all possible sets of goods, and all corresponding valuation profilesbelonging to a given, possibly restricted set. Also, note the implicit assumption that the auction setting—i.e., N, G andV N,G —is common knowledge among all bidders and the auctioneer.Definition 17 (CA mechanism). Let the set of valuation profile subspaces V be given. A deterministic direct CombinatorialAuction (CA) mechanism M (CA mechanism) maps each V N,G ∈ V , N ⊆ N and G ⊆ G, to a pair (a, p) where• a, the allocation scheme, maps each (cid:2)v ∈ V N,G to an allocation tuple a = (a1((cid:2)v), . . . , an((cid:2)v)) of goods, whereai((cid:2)v) ∩ a j((cid:2)v) = ∅ if i (cid:12)= j, and ai((cid:2)v) = ∅ if (cid:2)v i = ∅.• p, the payment scheme, maps each (cid:2)v ∈ V N,G to a payment tuple p = (p1((cid:2)v), . . . , pn((cid:2)v)), where pi((cid:2)v) is the paymentfrom bidder i to the auctioneer such that pi((cid:2)v) = 0 if (cid:2)v i = ∅.(cid:6)i ai((cid:2)v) ⊆ G,B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456453We say that CA mechanism M is defined for V . A CA mechanism is defined for known single-minded bidders if its setof valuation profile subspaces is V (ksm). From the definition it follows that the allocation and payment functions depend∈ V (ksm) from which bidders’ valuation profiles are drawn. Informally, b is known, since the allocationon the set Vand payments depend on b. Observe that our definition requires that the mechanism be defined for all possible knownsingle-minded valuations, not just for the set of bundles that a given set of bidders might value.(b)N,GA set of valuation subspaces V subsumes another set of valuation subspaces V (cid:3), there⊆ V N,G . For example, the set of valuation subspaces for single-minded bidders subsumesif and only if for all Vexists V N,G ∈ V such that Vthe set of valuation subspaces for known single-minded bidders.(cid:3)N,G(cid:3)N,G∈ V (cid:3)We can say that the class of mechanisms defined for V is a subset of the class of mechanisms defined for known single-minded bidders when V subsumes known single-minded valuations. The preceding claim is in fact true in a general sense,that is even if we replace known single-minded valuations with any V (cid:3). The following lemma states it formally. On somelevel this result is obvious; however, we were not able to find any formal discussion of it in the literature and so present ithere for completeness.Lemma 18. If V subsumes V (cid:3)implemented by a mechanism defined for V (cid:3)., then every social choice function that can be implemented by a mechanism defined for V can also beProof. Without loss of generality (by the revelation principle), we can restrict ourselves to truthful mechanisms. The allo-cation function in a truthful mechanism is precisely the social choice function. Let M(V) be a truthful mechanism definedfor V . Modify M(V) such that given declared valuation profile (cid:2)v ∈ V, runs the same allocation and payment, such a V N,G exists. Let M(V (cid:3))functions as M(V) would run on (cid:2)v ∈ V N,G , V N,G ∈ V , where Vbe this new mechanism that is defined for V (cid:3)∈ V (cid:3)⊆ V N,G . As V subsumes V (cid:3). M(V (cid:3)) is clearly truthful, since is M(V). (cid:2)(cid:3)N,G , V(cid:3)N,G(cid:3)N,GInformally speaking, for each mechanism M defined for V , there is a corresponding mechanism M(cid:3)defined for V (cid:3). Wewill use the above claim in Section 3 to state our result for general CA mechanisms.A.2. Properties of CA mechanismsHere, we formally define properties that we may require of a CA mechanism.Definition 19 (Dominant-strategy truthfulness). A CA mechanism M is dominant strategy truthful (or DS truthful) if and onlyif for all fixed sets of participating bidders, it is a best response for each participating bidder to declare her true valuationregardless of the declarations of the other participating bidders. That is, for all N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G, V N,G ∈ V , (cid:2)v ∈ V N,G , v i ∈V N,G,i , and for every bidder i we have that(cid:3)(cid:4)ai(v i,(cid:2)v−i)− pi(v i,(cid:2)v−i) (cid:2) v i(cid:3)(cid:4)ai((cid:2)v)− pi((cid:2)v).v iDefinition 20 (Participation). A truthful CA mechanism M satisfies participation if and only if for all N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G, V N,G ∈ V ,and v ∈ V N,G , pi(v) = 0 for all bidder i for whom v i(ai) = 0 (i.e., who does not win).Definition 21 (Efficiency). A CA mechanism M is efficient if its chosen allocation in equilibrium, awelfare; that is, for all N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G, V N,G ∈ V , and v ∈ V N,G ,∗ ∈ arg maxaa∈AN,G(cid:10)v i(ai).i∈N∗, maximizes the socialDefinition 22 (Revenue monotonicity). A truthful CA mechanism M is bidder revenue monotonic (or revenue monotonic) if andonly if for all N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G, V N,G ∈ V , v ∈ V N,G and for all bidders j,(cid:10)(cid:10)pi(v) (cid:2)pi(v− j).i∈Ni∈N\{ j}Definition 23 (Weak maximality). A truthful CA mechanism M is weakly maximal with respect to bidder i if and only if for allN ⊆ N where i ∈ N, for all G ⊆ G, and for all V N,G ∈ V , there exists a set of nonnegative finite constants {αN,G,V N,G ,i,g | g ∈G} such that the following holds. For all v ∈ V N,G , M always chooses an allocation a where either:1. v i(ai) > 0; or(cid:3)2. for all allocations a(cid:3)j) < v j(a j).j, v j(a(cid:3)i) > αN,G,V N,G ,i,awith v i(a(cid:3)i(cid:3), |ai(cid:3)| = 1, and aj(cid:3)i for all j (cid:12)= i, it must be the case that for some= a j \ a454B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456Note that α is subscripted by N, G and V N,G . This is because a CA mechanism may set different bidder-specific reserveprices for different settings, i.e. for different sets of participating bidders N, available goods G, and different valuationprofiles subspaces V N,G . Also note that in the informal definition of weak maximality that we provided in Section 2, V N,Gin the subscript of α was replaced by b, bidders’ bundles of interest. This change is innocuous as, in the case of knownsingle-minded bidders, all the knowledge that a mechanism extracts from V N,G can be learned from b.In what follows let (V N,G )−i denote the set {v−i | v ∈ V N,G }.Definition 24 (Consumer sovereignty). A CA mechanism M satisfies consumer sove/-reignty if and only if for all N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G,and V N,G ∈ V , ∀i ∈ N and ∀(cid:2)v−i ∈ (V N,G )−i , for all s ⊆ G that i may value above zero according to V N,G , there exists somefinite amount ksi ((cid:2)v−i) > 0, such that i can win s by reporting that she values s at amount at least ksi ((cid:2)v−i) ∈ R, ksi ((cid:2)v−i).Appendix B. MaximalityWe use a weakened version of maximality in our work as it is sufficient for our purpose and, being a weaker constraint,makes our impossibility result stronger. Maximality, on the other hand, is useful when one is trying to prove a possibilityresult (see, e.g., Rastegari et al. [25]).Definition 25 (Maximality). A truthful CA mechanism M is maximal with respect to bidder i if and only if for all N ⊆ N wherei ∈ N, for all G ⊆ G, and for all V N,G ∈ V , there exists a set of nonnegative finite constants {αN,G,V N,G ,i,s | s ⊆ G} such thatthe following holds. For all v ∈ V N,G , M always chooses an allocation a where either:1. v i(ai) > 0; or(cid:3)2. for all allocations a(cid:3)j) < v j(a j).v j(a(cid:3)i) > αN,G,V N,G ,i,awith v i(a(cid:3)i(cid:3), and aj(cid:3)= a j \ ai for allj (cid:12)= i, it must be the case that for some j,(cid:3)Observe that the definition of weak maximality is simply derived from the definition of maximality by restricting aito be of size 1. Intuitively, maximality ensures that the mechanism does not withhold any subset of goods, or give thegoods away to the bidders who do not value them, when they are sufficiently valued by a losing bidder. The quantities{αN,G,V N,G ,i,s | s ⊆ G} can be thought of as bidder- and bundle-specific reserve prices.7Many interesting mechanisms are maximal. First, it is straightforward to show that efficiency implies maximality. Second,we show here that a broad class of affine maximizing mechanisms are maximal.Affine maximizers generalize the idea behind the VCG mechanism’s allocation rule (which aims to maximize the socialwelfare) by allowing the mechanism to restrict the set of possible allocations, to assign different nonnegative weights ωi todifferent players, and to assign different additive weights γa to different allocations.Definition 26 (Affine maximizer). A CA mechanism is an affine maximizer if for some A(cid:3){γa}N,G, for all N ⊆ N, G ⊆ G, V N,G ∈ V, v ∈ V N,G , its chosen allocation in equilibrium, a⊆ AN,G , nonnegative {ωi}i∈N and∗satisfies the following:a∈A(cid:3)N,G∗ ∈ arg maxaa∈A(cid:3)N,G(cid:15)ωi v i(ai) + γa.(cid:14)(cid:10)iWe call {ωi}i∈N and {γa}a∈A(cid:3)N,Gthe allocation parameters of affine maximizer M.Theorem 27. Let M be an affine maximizing truthful CA mechanism with finite allocation parameters {ωi}i∈N and {γa}a∈AN,G . Supposethat for some i ∈ N, ωi > 0. Then M is maximal with respect to bidder i.Proof. Let αN,G,V N,G ,i,s = maxa{γa}, ∀N ⊆ N where i ∈ N, ∀G ⊆ G and ∀s ⊆ G. We prove that M is maximal with respect tobidder i. Assume for contradiction that M is not maximal with respect to i. Then, for some v, M’s allocation scheme maps= s and ∀ j (cid:12)= i,v to an allocation a that satisfies the following properties: (i) v i(ai) = 0, and (ii) ∃s ⊆ G, ∃a(cid:3)aj(cid:3)(cid:3)j) (cid:2) v j(a j).= a j \ s such that v i(ai) > αN,G,V N,G ,i,s and v j(aFrom construction and (i) and (ii) we have that(cid:3)(cid:3) ∈ AN,G : aiωi(cid:10)ωk vkk∈N(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)ak+ γa(cid:3) >(cid:10)ωk vkk∈N\{i}(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)ak+ maxa{γa} + γa(cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:10)k∈Nωk vk(ak) + γa.Since M is affine maximizing it would not choose allocation a, giving us our contradiction. (cid:2)7 Note that in the definition of maximality there exist distinct α variables for each different subset of goods s ⊆ G; in contrast, in the definition of weakmaximality, there exist distinct α’s only for each single good g ∈ G. Thus, we can understand the α’s as representing bundle-specific reserve prices inmaximal mechanisms, and item-specific reserve prices in weakly maximal mechanisms.B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456455Finally, all mechanisms that are strongly Pareto efficient with respect to bidders’ valuations are also maximal.Definition 28 (Strong Pareto efficiency with respect to bidders’ valuations). A mechanism is strongly Pareto efficient with respect tobidders’ valuations if it chooses allocations that would be strongly Pareto efficient if monetary transfers were disallowed.Note that these allocations are a superset of those that are strongly Pareto efficient when transfers are permitted. Thus,a broader class of mechanisms achieves strong Pareto efficiency with respect to bidders’ valuations than achieve strongPareto efficiency.In case of single-minded bidders, strong Pareto efficiency with respect to bidder’s valuations is equivalent to maximalitywith respect to all bidders when all bidder- and bundle-specific reserve prices, α’s, are set to zero.In general, however, maximality is a weaker condition than strong Pareto efficiency. To see this, consider an examplewith a single bidder, 1, and two goods {g1, g2}. Assume that bidder 1 values each good individually, and also (e.g., by freedisposal) values a bundle of both goods. A mechanism that awards either of the goods, but not both, to bidder 1 is maximalbut does not satisfy strong Pareto efficiency. Alternatively, if bidder 1 were single-minded and interested in {g1, g2}, thenany mechanism would be weakly maximal with respect to bidder 1, whereas a mechanism that is maximal with respect tobidder 1 has to award both goods to her as long as she values them above the bidder- and bundle-specific reserve price.Appendix C. Impossibility results for general CA mechanismsTheorem 29. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M be a CA mechanism whose set of valuation subspaces V subsumes known single-mindedbidders, that offers dominant strategies to the bidders and satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality withrespect to at least two bidders. Then M is not revenue monotonic.Proof. The proof directly follows from Lemma 18 and Theorem 5. Following Lemma 18, if there is a mechanism M definedfor V —i.e., M’s set of valuation subspaces is V —that offers dominant strategies to the bidders and satisfies participation,consumer sovereignty, weak maximality with respect to at least two bidders and revenue monotonicity, then there existsa mechanism M(ksm) defined for known single-minded bidders that has all the above properties. By Theorem 5, such amechanism M(ksm) does not exist, and thus nor does such a mechanism M. (cid:2)The following corollaries are the extension of those in Section 4 to the general case. We omit the proofs as they are verysimilar to the proofs given in Section 4 except that they have to also appeal to Lemma 18, making an argument similar tothe one in the proof of Theorem 29.Corollary 30. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M be a CA mechanism whose set of valuation subspaces subsumes known single-mindedbidders, that offers dominant strategies to the bidders, and that satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximalitywith respect to at least two bidders. Then M is not false-name-proof.Let pGi (v) denote bidder i’s payment to a DS truthful CA mechanism when all bidders’ valuations are v, and where theset of goods at auction is G. Then we can give the following definition.Definition 31 (Good revenue monotonicity). A truthful CA mechanism M is good revenue monotonic if and only if for allN ⊆ N, G ⊆ G, V N,G ∈ V , v ∈ V N,G and for all goods g ∈ G,(cid:10)(cid:10)i (v) (cid:2)pGG\{g}ip(v).i∈Ni∈NCorollary 32. Let |G| (cid:2) 3 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M be a CA mechanism whose set of valuation subspaces subsumes known single-mindedbidders, that offers dominant strategies to the bidders and satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality withrespect to at least two bidders. Then M is not good revenue monotonic.Corollary 33. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M be a CA mechanism whose set of valuation subspaces subsumes known single-mindedbidders, that offers dominant strategies to the bidders, and that satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and efficiency. Then, thereexists a valuation profile for which the auction’s imputation does not belong to the core.Corollary 34. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M be a CA mechanism whose set of valuation subspaces V subsumes known single-mindedbidders, that offers dominant strategies to the bidders and satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality withrespect to at least two bidders. Define the auction game as in Definition 11 or Definition 12. Then, there exists a valuation profile forwhich the auction’s imputation does not belong to the core.456B. Rastegari et al. / Artificial Intelligence 175 (2011) 441–456Corollary 35. Let |G| (cid:2) 2 and |N| (cid:2) 3. Let M be a CA mechanism whose set of valuation subspaces V subsumes known single-mindedbidders, that offers dominant strategies to the bidders and satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality withthat allows bidders to express the same preferences as in M andrespect to at least two bidders. Then there exists a CA mechanism Mthat(cid:3)1. has the same allocation and payment functions as M, except that it may have a different cv i(∅, . . . , ∅) for some (single) i ∈ N;2. satisfies participation, consumer sovereignty, and weak maximality with respect to at least two bidders; and3. chooses an outcome that is not guaranteed to belong to the core.References[1] N. Andelman, Y. Mansour, A sufficient condition for truthfulness with single parameter agents, in: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on ElectronicCommerce (EC), Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, 2006, pp. 8–17.[2] A. Archer, E. Tardos, Truthful mechanisms for one-parameter agents, in: Proceedings of the Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of ComputerScience (FOCS), Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2001, pp. 482–491.[3] L.M. Ausubel, P. Cramton, P. Milgrom, The clock-proxy auction: A practical combinatorial auction design, in: P. Cramton, Y. Shoham, R. Steinberg (Eds.),Combinatorial Auctions, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2006, pp. 115–138 (Ch. 5).[4] L.M. Ausubel, P. Milgrom, Ascending auctions with package bidding, Frontiers of Theoretical Economics 1 (1) (2002).[5] L.M. Ausubel, P. Milgrom, The lovely but lonely Vickrey auction, in: P. Cramton, Y. Shoham, R. Steinberg (Eds.), Combinatorial Auctions, MIT Press,Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2006, pp. 17–40 (Ch. 1).[6] M. Babaioff, R. Lavi, E. Pavlov, Mechanism design for single-value domains, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania, USA, 2005, pp. 241–247.[7] M. Babaioff, R. Lavi, E. Pavlov, Single-value combinatorial auctions and implementation in undominated strategies, in: Proceedings of the Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), Miami, Florida, USA, 2006, pp. 1054–1063.[8] D.B. Bernheim, M. Whinston, Menu auctions, resource allocation and economic influence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (1) (1986) 1–31.[9] S. Bikhchandani, S. Chatterji, R. Lavi, A. Mu’alem, N. Nisan, A. Sen, Weak monotonicity characterizes deterministic dominant-strategy implementation,Econometrica 74 (4) (2006) 1109–1132.[10] E.H. Clarke, Multipart pricing of public goods, Public Choice 11 (1) (1971) 17–33.[11] F. Constantin, D.C. Parkes, Preference-based characterizations of truthfulness and the limited expressiveness of order-based domains, in: Proceedings ofthe Workshop on Preference Handling Position Paper, 2005.[12] P. Cramton, Y. Shoham, R. Steinberg (Eds.), Combinatorial Auctions, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2006.[13] R. Day, P. Milgrom, Core-selecting package auctions, International Journal of Game Theory 36 (3–4) (2008) 393–407.[14] J. Feigenbaum, A. Krishnamurthy, R. Sami, S. Shenkar, Hardness results for multicast cost sharing, Theoretical Computer Science 304 (1–3) (2003)215–236.[15] J. Green, J.-J. Laffont, Characterization of satisfactory mechanisms for the revelation of preferences for public goods, Econometrica 45 (2) (1977) 427–438.[16] T. Groves, Incentives in teams, Econometrica 41 (4) (1973) 617–631.[17] R. Lavi, A. Mu’alem, N. Nisan, Towards a characterization of truthful combinatorial auctions, in: Proceedings of the Annual IEEE Symposium on Foun-dations of Computer Science (FOCS), Cambridge, MA, USA, 2003, pp. 574–583.[18] D. Lehmann, L.I. O’Callaghan, Y. Shoham, Truth revelation in approximately efficient combinatorial auctions, Journal of the ACM 49 (5) (2002) 1–26.[19] A. Mu’alem, N. Nisan, Truthful approximation mechanisms for restricted combinatorial auctions: Extended abstract, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 2002, pp. 379–384.[20] N. Nisan, Introduction to mechanism design, in: N. Nisan, T. Roughgarden, E. Tardos, V.V. Vazirani (Eds.), Algorithmic Game Theory, Cambridge Univer-sity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2007, Ch. 9.[21] N. Nisan, A. Ronen, Computationally feasible VCG mechanisms, in: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC), Minneapolis,Minnesota, USA, 2000, pp. 242–252.[22] D. Porter, S. Rassenti, A. Roopnarine, V. Smith, Combinatorial auction design, in: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United Statesof America, PNAS 100 (19) (2003) 11153–11157.[23] S. Rassenti, V.L. Smith, R.L. Bulfin, A combinatorial auction mechanism for airport time slot allocation, The Bell Journal of Economics 13 (2) (1982)402–417.[24] B. Rastegari, A. Condon, K. Leyton-Brown, Revenue monotonicity in combinatorial auctions, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence, Vancouver, Canada, 2007, pp. 122–127.[25] B. Rastegari, A. Condon, K. Leyton-Brown, Stepwise randomized combinatorial auctions achieve revenue monotonicity, in: Proceedings of the AnnualACM–SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 738–747.[26] K. Roberts, The characterization of implementable choice rules, in: J.-J. Laffont (Ed.), Aggregation and Revelation of Preferences, North Holland Publish-ing Company, 1979, pp. 321–348.[27] J.-C. Rochet, A necessary and sufficient condition for rationalizability in a quasi-linear context, Journal of Mathematical Economics 16 (2) (1987) 191–200.[28] M.H. Rothkopf, Thirteen reasons why the Vickrey–Clarke–Groves process is not practical, Operations Research 55 (2) (2007) 191–197.[29] M. Saks, L. Yu, Weak monotonicity suffices for truthfulness on convex domains, in: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC),Vancouver, BC, 2005, pp. 286–293.[30] T. Todo, A. Iwasaki, M. Yokoo, Characterization of strategy-proof, revenue monotone combinatorial auction mechanisms and connection with false-name-proofness, in: Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Internet and Network Economics, WINE’09, 2009, pp. 561–568.[31] W. Vickrey, Counterspeculations, auctions, and competitive sealed tenders, Journal of Finance 16 (1) (1961) 8–37.[32] M. Yokoo, Pseudonymous bidding in combinatorial auctions, in: P. Cramton, Y. Shoham, R. Steinberg (Eds.), Combinatorial Auctions, MIT Press, Cam-bridge, Massachusetts, 2006, pp. 161–187 (Ch. 7).[33] M. Yokoo, T. Matsutani, A. Iwasaki, False-name-proof combinatorial auction protocol: Groves mechanism with submodular approximation, in: Proceed-ings of the International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), Hakodate, Japan, 2006, pp. 1135–1142.[34] M. Yokoo, Y. Sakurai, S. Matsubara, Robust combinatorial auction protocol against false-name bids, Artificial Intelligence 130 (2) (2001) 167–181.[35] M. Yokoo, Y. Sakurai, S. Matsubara, The effect of false-name bids in combinatorial auctions: New fraud in internet auctions, Games and EconomicBehavior 46 (1) (2004) 174–188.