Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685www.elsevier.com/locate/artintRough intervals—enhancing intervals for qualitative modeling oftechnical systemsM. RebolledoUniversität Stuttgart, Institute of Industrial Automation and Software Engineering, Pfaffenwaldring 47, 70569 Stuttgart, GermanyReceived 8 October 2004; received in revised form 29 December 2005; accepted 15 February 2006AbstractThe success of model-based industrial applications generally depends on how exactly models reproduce the behavior of the realsystem that they represent. However, the complexity of industrial systems makes the construction of accurate models difficult. Analternative is the qualitative description of process states, for example by means of the discretization of continuous variable spacesin intervals. In order to reach the required precision in the modeling of complex dynamic systems, interval-based representationsusually produce qualitative models, which are sometimes too large for practical use. The approach introduced in this paper incorpo-rates vague and uncertain information based on principles of the Rough Set Theory as a way of enhancing the information contentsin interval-based qualitative models. The resulting models are more compact and precise than ordinary qualitative models.© 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Keywords: Rough set; Qualitative modeling; Qualitative reasoning; Interval-based knowledge representation; Vagueness and uncertaintymanagement1. IntroductionMany industrial systems rely on models to support applications such as process simulation, advanced control, faultdiagnosis and online monitoring. Working on a correct and precise system model is always cheaper, faster, easierand safer than working with the real system. But modeling real systems is not always straightforward. Models canonly be employed if they mimic the original system precisely. However, this model precision, i.e. how well thismodel reproduces the system behavior or characteristics, is not determined by the model itself, but by the intendedapplication, and is therefore often more a requirement than a feature. A further problem is that industrial systems areusually too complex to be described, meaningfully and wholly, with precise deterministic models. To make mattersworse, system complexity and precision demand in model-based applications increase with each new technologicaldevelopment.Humans are able of abstracting complex processes and describing them qualitatively using expert knowledge andcommon sense. Therefore, a way of dealing with the described problems is focusing only upon the system aspects tobe analyzed, enhanced or supervised, and representing these aspects in qualitative models. Such qualitative modelsusually describe continuous variables by dividing the spaces where they are defined in intervals [3,15]. Yet, using in-E-mail address: mrrw2002@yahoo.com (M. Rebolledo).0004-3702/$ – see front matter © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2006.02.004668M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685Table 1Representing qualities as binary messages(a)(b)A0A1AB1B1B0C0BC0C0tervals to represent continuous physical dimensions implies losing information about the system behavior during statetransitions, because an interval-based partitioned variable can change its qualitative value instantaneously. Definingadditional transitional intervals reduces this information loss. Important transitions can be well described, for instance,using one-point intervals, but it is impossible to describe the behavior of the system as it nears or leaves these points.Besides, defining one-point intervals may result in models that are too large to describe entire complex dynamicsystems.Interval-based qualitative models are analogous to using just one bit at a time in a N -bits message (e.g. 10000,01000, 00100). This is underutilizing the 2N representation capability of these N -bits. However, because of continuity,it is not always the case that 2N different messages are physically possible. Using a message such as 01001 to describea particular system state may be nonsense. For instance, a given continuous variable may be represented using threeintervals (representing qualities A, B and C respectively) and two one-point transitional intervals. The equivalentbinary representation is a 5-bits word, which is only allowed to get one of five possible values: 10000, 01000, 00100,00010 or 00001. Table 1(a) shows the equivalent binary representation of a system in the transition point betweenquality A and quality B.This paper introduces a concept to enhance intervals as information representation framework, by allowing theoverlapping of qualities in intermediate states. This eliminates, for example, the need of defining one-point transitionalintervals and makes easier modeling the vagueness and uncertainty in transitions. Following the previous example,this would correspond to using only three bits to code the five possible states of the variable (Table 1(b)). Of course,binary values 000 and 101 are still not allowed.The proposed concept takes advantage of principles of the Rough Set Theory. The resulting representation, theRough Interval, is more suited for dealing with partially unknown or ill-defined parameters and variables. Additionally,Rough Intervals are capable of coding more information than ordinary intervals, as it is suggested by the example of theanalog binary representation. The resulting qualitative models are, therefore, more compact for a required precision,or the same, more precise for a given model size. This improvement in the relation precision/size in qualitative modelsexpands the applicability of qualitative modeling methods in complex systems. The new concept was integrated inthe qualitative modeling method SQMA (Situation-based Qualitative Modeling and Analysis) [33], which allowed theverification of the described enhancements. This concept is, however, independent from SQMA and can therefore beintegrated into other qualitative reasoning techniques as well.2. Theoretic frameworkThe following sections describe briefly the techniques and methods that served as basis for the development andfurther application of the proposed concept. In the first place, the most cited qualitative reasoning techniques are intro-duced, followed for a detailed analysis of interval-based methods. This gradual approach, from general to particular,closes with a brief description of SQMA, technique used as case study. The Rough Set Theory, the theory upon withthe interval-based representation of qualitative information is enhanced, considering vagueness and uncertainty, isintroduced in this section as well.2.1. Qualitative reasoningA way of dealing with system complexity is describing system behavior using rules or tables, based on experienceand common sense. One approach that implements this idea is qualitative reasoning, which approximates humanthinking and reasoning by capturing fundamental system behavior in a computer model, while suppressing much ofM. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685669the detail. Qualitative reasoning is an area of Artificial Intelligence that supports reasoning with very little information,providing promising tools for research and engineering activities.The first of two processes normally included in qualitative reasoning is Qualitative modeling. It abstracts continu-ous aspects of real processes, such as space, time and other physical quantities to model the fundamental behavior ofa system. The second process is qualitative simulation, which uses previously determined qualitative models to pre-dict possible behaviors of the modeled system. In order to achieve this, a qualitative simulator generates an expectedoutput from the real system’s inputs based on the qualitative model and compares simulated and actual behavior. Im-portant representatives of qualitative reasoning are the methods introduced by de Kleer and Brown [15], Kuipers [3],Forbus [18,19], Lunze [16] and Laufenberg and Fröhlich [33]:– De Kleer’s approach employs a special Physics based on Confluences for qualitative system modeling. Con-fluences are the qualitative depiction of differential equations, where only the symbols [−], [0], [+] and [?](for negative, zero, positive and undetermined) are accepted as arguments. Confluences are managed with signarithmetic represented in a tabular form. This arithmetic includes the derivative function δ[x] = Sign(dx/dt) torepresent system dynamics.– Kuipers’ Qualitative Simulation (QSim) is one of the most cited qualitative reasoning methods. QSim’s qualitativemodel uses an interval-based representation of physical variables and qualitative differential equations. Intervalsand qualitative differential equations are operated based on the sign (+/−) of the variables and threshold valuesassociated with qualitative system changes.– The Qualitative Process Theory introduced by Forbus regards the modeled system as a collection of Objects,Quantities and Processes. Objects are entities in the universe of the problem that are capable of interacting witheach other. Quantities describe the continuous properties of Objects in terms of ordinal relations, while Processesmodify the Objects, their relationships and their properties. The Qualitative Process Theory also models thepossibility of entities being created and destroyed, as part of a dynamic universe.– Lunze introduced an approach based on the qualitative representation of the process dynamics with nondetermin-istic automata. This approach considers process states and events as sets of qualities, which results in a QualitativeAutomaton. If the probability of each particular transition is represented in the model, the resulting state machineis known as a Qualitative Stochastic Automaton.– Laufenberg and Fröhlich’s Situation-based Qualitative Modeling and Analysis approach (SQMA) models a sys-tem using interval-based qualitative descriptions of situations that can take place. These situations, gathered in atable of valid situations, correspond in technical systems to a qualitative description of the finite set of states wherethe process can reside. SQMA serves as case study for the evaluation of the proposed representation concept andis, for this reason, described in detail in Section 2.3.The above described approaches have been employed, for example, to monitor and analyze the correct function-ing of industrial processes. Many successful process monitoring and diagnosis applications, such as MIMIC [5,6],SQUID [13] and SQMD [30], have been developed based on these methods. However, qualitative modeling has beenalso applied to the treatment of problems in other areas, such as biological [11] and socio-economical [10] systems,and to support academic activities as in the case of CyclePad [20]. Each technique has strengths and weaknesses,according to its application. In common, they have their capability of handling incomplete information by systemmodeling.2.2. Interval based qualitative representationIn mathematics, a container that includes or excludes any given element of a completely defined universe of dis-course is called a set. According to the Classic Set Theory, an object (element) can either be part of a given set or beexcluded; i.e. each element of the universe of discourse is either in the set or out of it. A classic set can represent anyidea or concept, as shown in the example in Fig. 1, where the set C should contain all the big objects of the depicteduniverse of six elements.Even though concept borders in most real problems are not crisp, classic sets are usually employed to approximatethem, as it is shown in Fig. 1. But objects 3 and 4 have almost the same size, with object 3 just a little bit bigger.It can be considered, for instance, that object 4 is also big. On the other hand, it is perhaps not big enough. Similar670M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685Fig. 1. Classic set C of the big objects.Fig. 2. Prefix and interval representation.questions can be formulated about object 3. A classic set resolves only approximately this problem by adopting atrade-off position, such as that of the set C.This classic set notion can be adapted to continuous variables (e.g. the object’s cross area) instead of objects, justby delimiting value ranges in the dimension where these variables are defined. Value ranges are frequently used forthe depiction of vague concepts and imprecise values, such as in the case of “big” in the previous example. Theyare usually associated with specific system characteristics or behaviors enabling the qualitative modeling of a system.Value ranges can be used to represent discrete and logic values as well, which offers a common framework for thequalitative modeling of real process variables and parameters.A form of value range notation is the prefix sign representation relative to a reference point [15]. In this notationsystem, a qualitative value is derived from the prefix of the quantitative value in the reference system determined by thereferential point. Fig. 2(a) shows this kind of qualitative representation. [x]y is a qualitative variable with the values“+”, “0” or “−”; where x is a variable and y is a parameter that serves as reference point for the qualitative variable[x]y. The qualitative variable [x]y obtains respectively, for x < y, x = y and x > y, the qualitative values “−”, “0”and “+”. It is valid therefore that [x]0 = Sign(x). De Kleer and Brown’s Physics based on Confluences [15] relies onprefix sign representation. Additionally, this notational principle is generally used to represent process dynamics inqualitative models.Based on the principle above-described, many reference points may be defined at will, in order to generalize theinterval bordering. The result of the superposition of these qualitative variables is an interval representation. Theinterval [a b], with a < b, describes the value range between the reference points a and b. For example, I3 = [−2 1.4]in Fig. 2(b) includes the values 0, 1, and 0.5 among others. Following this notation, intervals of the form [a a] describethe reference point exactly as the corresponding real number a (e.g. I2 = [−2 −2] = −2 in Fig. 2(b)). Closed and openinterval limits (square brackets and parentheses respectively) define whether a given reference point must be includedin the interval or not. In any case, the borders of these intervals are crisp (from here the name “crisp interval”); thereis no continuous transition or common point between adjacent intervals. Finally, there are also unbounded intervalsin the form (−∞ a] and [b +∞). They describe the area from −∞ to point a (I1 = (−∞ −2] in Fig. 2(b)) and theregion between the reference point b and +∞ (I4 = [1.4 ∞) in Fig. 2(b)). It is not necessary to portray the entiredimension; it often suffices representing excerpts of it.For working with intervals, Moore [29] developed the interval arithmetic as an extension of the basic arithmeticoperations with real numbers (addition, subtraction, etc.). This arithmetic also redefines the relational operators. A re-lationship, such as “greater than”, “lower than” or “equal to” is satisfied, as soon as individual points of the comparedintervals satisfy it. Equality, for example, is determined based on the existence of intersection (i.e. common points) be-M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685671tween intervals. Relational operators in interval arithmetic are therefore nondeterministic, i.e. for any two overlappingintervals A and B it can be possible to satisfy the three relationships A = B, A > B and A < B at the same time. Thisis the case, for example, of the intervals (1 5) and [3 6). This nondeterminism reproduces the natural nondeterminismin human qualitative appraisals.Interval arithmetic enabled the realization of complex calculations with intervals, and thus, the development of theinterval-based qualitative methods. Situation-based Qualitative Modeling and Qualitative Automata are two methodsbased on the representation of physical variables using previously defined intervals. One of the most cited qualita-tive modeling techniques, Kuipers’s Qualitative Simulation, defines intervals whose reference values are dynamicallydetermined during the simulation process.2.3. Situation-based qualitative modeling and analysis, SQMASituation-based Qualitative Modeling and Analysis (SQMA) is a modeling method developed at the Institute ofIndustrial Automation and Software Engineering of the Universität Stuttgart. SQMA was conceived for safety-relatedapplications, such as hazard analysis [31], fault detection [25,30], diagnosis [2] and reliability assurance [12], whichrequire the comprehensive modeling of complex systems. SQMA models a system using qualitative descriptions ofthe situations that can take place. These situations, gathered in a table of valid situations, correspond in technicalsystems to a qualitative description of the finite set of states where the process can reside. Each situation considersfor each system variable a particular qualitative value, which is represented by an interval. SQMA modeling works asshown in Fig. 3.The system modeler structures the whole system hierarchically and decomposes the innermost level (#1 in Fig. 3)into components. After that, component variables are modeled using intervals and characteristic values represented asone-value-intervals (#2 in Fig. 3). Physical rules that will be used for the situation verification are formulated usinginterval arithmetic to complete the description of each component. The computer-aided modeling of a componentchecks every possible interval combination (component situation). A given component situation is valid if it complieswith all the rules declared for the corresponding component. This makes it possible to detect and to remove impossibleFig. 3. Situation based qualitative modeling, SQMA.672M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685interval combinations. An SQMA component model is defined upon these valid interval combinations collected in acomponent situation table (#3 in Fig. 3), which describes the normal behavior of the component.Envisioning in SQMA components relies on a transition rule testing procedure. This procedure is similar to theprocedure implemented for situation validation. It uses the relationships determining the system dynamics, which aredescribed with interval arithmetic as well, to validate the transitions between component situations. The modeling toolchecks each possible situation transition and marks (“1”) the valid ones, while invalid transitions remain unmarked(“0”). A quadratic matrix with situations in rows and columns, the component transition matrix (#4 in Fig. 3), collectsthe result of this validation and completes the component model. This matrix, representing all states the system cantake, with all of the transitions between them, is formally known as its envisionment in qualitative reasoning literature.SQMA component models can be reused (in case of similar components in the system) or further combined at systemlevel. Moreover, complete component models can be stored in a component library for future use.To model the current hierarchical system level, the situation tables of all the components at this level are combined.An automated procedure assembles the rules that describe the relationships between these components and betweencomponents and system terminals following the way they are connected with each other. These system rules expressmaterial and energy balances, similar to Kirchhof’s laws in electric circuits, and are used to validate coincidences ofcomponent situations collected in an initial system situation table. The system rule validation follows the same ruleverification primitives employed for situation and transition validation in the components. That results in a situationtable, which lists all the possible behaviors of the entire system (#5 in Fig. 3).The corresponding system transition matrix (#6 in Fig. 3) is built by verifying the component transition matricesafter the following rule: A transition between two system situations (in the system transition matrix) is only possible(and therefore marked), if the corresponding transition (in the component transition matrix) is also possible for eachsingle component. The envisioning at system level completes the situation based qualitative model of the currenthierarchical level. The structure of this model is identical to the structure of component models, and can by similarlyreused, further combined or stored in an SQMA model library.In very complex systems, it can be necessary to resolve several hierarchical levels to model the whole system. Forexample, pumps, valves, heaters and vessels can be modeled as single components and combined to model evapo-rators, reactors or distillation columns. These process units can be combined, following different configurations, toform a number of bigger and more complex process units. These process units can then be combined to model firstprocess plants and then entire petrochemical or refinery complexes with a group of plants, tens of processing units andhundreds of single-component types. In these cases, the described procedure is repeated for each hierarchical leveluntil the completion of the system model.A common problem of qualitative modeling techniques is the size of envisionments that result from modeling (forinstance) entire process plants. In the same way, SQMA transition matrices grow very fast with the complexity andsize of the modeled system. Even if building up the envisionment hierarchically is faster and easier, the resulting tablecan be too large for practical use. An advantage of SQMA, however, is the possibility of generating and managingmodels at multiple levels of abstraction. This allows a convenient definition of the different hierarchical levels to avoidor at least to mitigate this problem.2.4. Rough Set TheoryPawlak proposed the Rough Set Theory in 1982 [34] as a method for the joint management of vagueness anduncertainty. It is based on the Classic Set Theory, but is inspired by Zadeh’s fuzzy sets [23]. Reasoning in the RoughSet Theory is a matter of classification, not a matter of degrees of truth. A basic assumption in Rough Set Theory isthat any concept can be defined through the collection of all the objects that exhibit the properties associated with it.Therefore, a vague concept, expressed as a vague classification criterion, is always susceptible of being decomposed intwo well-delimited concepts (here, two classification criteria) that can be further handled independently. For a vagueconcept R, it can be formulated:• a lower approximation R∗ containing all the elements that are surely included in R, and• an upper approximation R∗ containing those elements that cannot be excluded, beyond doubt, from R.M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685673Fig. 4. Vague information with rough sets.Table 2Properties of the rough membershipρBX (z) = 1ρBX (z) = 00 < ρBX (z) < 1U −X(z) = 1 − ρBρBρBX∪Y (z) (cid:2) max(ρBX∩Y (z) (cid:3) min(ρBρBX (z)X (z), ρBX (z), ρBY (z))Y (z))if z ∈ B∗(X)if z /∈ B∗(X)if z ∈ BNB (X)for any z ∈ Ufor any z ∈ Ufor any z ∈ UAnother important premise is that some information about the elements of the universe of discourse is available. Ifthe same information can be associated with several elements of this universe, these elements are indiscernible; i.e.they cannot be separated from each other. Hence, the lower and the upper approximation of a set X, representing theoriginal vague concept, can be defined based on this indiscernibility regarding the available information B:Lower approximation: B∗(X) =Upper approximation: B∗(X) =(cid:2)z ∈ U : B(z) ⊆ X(cid:3),(cid:2)z ∈ U : B(z) ∩ X (cid:8)= 0(cid:3),(1)(2)B(z) represents in these definitions the set of all the elements of U , which are indiscernible from z based on theinformation in B.Fig. 4 illustrates the classification-based notion of rough set. The left side shows the elements z ∈ U ={1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} to be classified according to their membership to a vague concept X (e.g. representing the feature“big”) and the available information B. The right side of the figure represents the vague concept X following roughset’s principles. The inner set B∗ (lower approximation) comprises elements {1, 2} that are unequivocally includedin X. The outer set consists of elements {5, 6} that definitively are not part of X(e.g. they are small objects). Theclassification of {3, 4} is uncertain, e.g. it is not possible to decide whether they are big or small. Elements {1, 2, 3, 4}define together the upper approximation of X.The vagueness problem is so transformed in an uncertainty problem, which is concentrated in the set B∗(X) −B∗(X), known as the Boundary region (BNB (X)) of the concept X based on the information B. This boundary setrepresents the uncertainty in the concept, where no solid conclusion can be reached about whether objects are bigor small. A probability-based rough membership function is then necessary to address the uncertainty problem. Thisrough membership can be defined using the indiscernibility relationship:ρBX (z) =|X ∩ B(z)||B(z)|.(3)The symbol ρ will be used to represent rough membership instead of the generally used μ, with the intention ofexplicitly marking the difference with fuzzy membership, where the symbol μ is also employed. The function | . . . |represents the size of the set, i.e. the number of elements in it. Table 2 shows the most important properties of therough membership function (see [35] for a complete list). There is no further restriction about the form of a roughmembership function beyond these properties.3. Enhancing intervals considering vagueness and uncertaintyMost variables in industrial processes are defined in continuous numerical spaces, and most of these continuousvariables can only change their values gradually, because their behavior is bound with the energy flow in the system.674M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685Under these conditions, representing dynamic systems based on crisp intervals is very imprecise. Crisp intervalsprovide static views of the continuous dynamic variables; therefore, interval-based models can only provide staticviews of reality.This section describes a new approach for partitioning continuous variables, which is based on Rough Intervals.The approach takes advantage of the representation and management of vagueness and uncertainty in interval-basedqualitative models, applying principles of the Rough Set Theory to improve the model precision and compactness.3.1. Interval-based management of uncertainty and vaguenessThe term “incomplete information” is usually cited in association with interval-based qualitative modeling. How-ever, this term does not necessarily mean that the system information is incomplete in the sense of its availability(partial or total ignorance) or in any way insufficient. For instance, even though intervals can be arbitrarily chosen,a deep knowledge about the system may support a better partition of the variable spaces. Incomplete information inqualitative modeling can be associated with uncertainty or ignorance about the process, but also with the deliberatesimplification (abstraction) of system information before using it to build a model. Crisp intervals are successfullyemployed to approximate this kind of “incomplete” information. They allow representing the most probable parame-ter values or scenarios in qualitative relationships. Another problem, however, regards the uncertainty arising from thenondeterministic nature of qualitative models [24], in the form of the typically huge envisionments delivered by qual-itative reasoning methods. Interval-based qualitative models do not offer indexes or measures such as probabilities orpossibilities [4], which could support the analysis of a solution space containing multiple alternative behaviors.A different aspect is the modeling based on approximate or inaccurate descriptions of a system. Modeling vaguelevel concepts such as “too high” or “almost empty” would require defining new intervals for each one of these cases,but the definition of these additional intervals would mean enlarging the model drastically. The space of a qualitativemodel grows in a geometrical progression with the number of intervals defined on its variables. Thus, it is necessaryto achieve a fair qualitative representation of vague information without increasing the model size.An alternative way of representing vagueness is using weighting values to express the confidence on the availableinformation. Qualitative modeling methods, such as FuSim [28], QuaSi [1] and FRenSi [32], follow this approach.They introduce the management of vague information using fuzzy sets and fuzzy numbers. FRenSi and QuaSi, forinstance, preprocess vagueness using fuzzy numbers and then transform the intermediate results into equivalent inter-vals to continue operating with interval arithmetic, while FuSim adapts QSim and Moore’s interval arithmetic to workwith fuzzy sets, which results in a complex hybrid fuzzy/interval notation and an extended fuzzy arithmetic. However,none of these methods take uncertainty into account.A new method is required, which offers a consistent solution for the compact modeling and further handling ofvagueness and uncertainty in interval-based qualitative models. Hence, a method based on rough sets is proposed.Rough Set Theory unifies vagueness and uncertainty as different aspects of the same problem. Additionally, informa-tion representation with rough sets is based on crisp sets, which is less demanding than representing and processingcontinuous fuzzy membership functions.3.2. Rough intervalsRough sets are defined over sets and elements and therefore cannot be used for the representation of continuousvariables [9,22] as it is the case with crisp intervals and fuzzy sets. Rough Intervals are introduced to adapt the roughset principles to the modeling of continuous variables. A Rough Interval (RI) is a particular case of a rough set.They fulfill all the rough set’s properties and core concepts, including the upper and lower approximation definitions.A Rough Interval comprises two parts: an Upper Approximation Interval (UAI) and a Lower Approximation Interval(LAI). The variable could assume inside of the UAI the represented qualitative value (a vague concept in rough sets),or what is the same, it is clear that the variable cannot get this qualitative value outside of this interval. The secondelement of a RI, the LAI, can be also redefined on this basis; In the LAI it is sure that the variable takes the representedqualitative value.The Lower and Upper Approximation Interval concepts satisfy the mathematical definition of rough set’s upperand lower approximation in (1) and (2), adapted to intervals. If a particular qualitative value C must be representedover a variable, the two enveloping intervals, A∗ and A∗, can be defined. The implications (4) and (5) represent theM. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685675Fig. 5. “Warm” represented as a Rough Interval.relationship between the variable x ∈ U (where the universe U can be any complete set of continuous or discretevalues), the qualitative value A defined on x, and the intervals A∗ and A∗.x ∈ Ax /∈ A∗ ⇒ x ∈ A,∗ ⇒ x /∈ A.(4)(5)No special knowledge is required to use these simple definitions as design rules. They do not complement each other,in fact, the second one is a subset of the first one; the Lower Approximation Interval can be and must be definedinside of the Upper Approximation Interval. For instance, the definition of “Warm” in a temperature variable may beconsidered. Common sense and general knowledge can help defining its limits, for example:– The temperature of the human body is about 37 ◦C. Nothing warmer will be considered “Cold”.– In average, a human hand cannot hold an object, whose temperature is over 70◦C, because it is “Hot”.– If something is colder than the environment (let us say 17 ◦C), it cannot be considered “Warm” anymore.A few statistical considerations, together with some sense of symmetry may assist an expert completing the de-finition of this Rough Interval and its neighbors. A set of two crisp intervals can represent the resulting RIs. TheRough Interval shown in Fig. 5 represents the qualitative value “Warm”. The key fact in this example was the use ofprecise concepts to define an imprecise one. They may be supported by verifiable knowledge, statistics or physicallaws, which are in general measurable, trustworthy and easier to model than the original vague concept.The Rough Set Theory reduces the vagueness of a concept to uncertainty areas at their borders. Within theseuncertainty areas, in Rough Intervals as in rough sets, no definitive conclusion about the problem is possible. Hence,rough membership values (ρ) must be defined for Rough Intervals as well. These rough memberships membershipvalues, expressed in rough membership functions, must satisfy all the conditions listed in Table 2 and [35], but alsothe following properties:Complementarity. RI overlaps are transient areas between two clearly typified regions (LAIs, where the membershipof any value to the RI is 1). In an overlap, the variable changes gradually from one quality to another, likefrom “warm” to “cold” or “short” to “long”. Thus, the rough membership of a given real value inside ofthis transition area to the one RI decreases, as the rough membership of the same real value to the adjacentone grows. Consequently, totalizing the rough membership of any value to its corresponding RIs will alwaysresult in 1.Monotonicity. In a numeric space, there is a relation of precedence and consequence, an order among its elements,which determines the necessity of using monotonic growing and decreasing functions in the boundary regionsof a Rough Interval to represent these rough membership values.Border Conditions. Rough membership is an expression of the probability of being part of a clearly defined concept,which is in RI delimited by the LAI. Thus, and considering the properties above, a given number in theboundary region is part of the represented concept with a probability that increases with the proximity of thisnumber to the LAI, where this probability, and consequently the rough membership function, reaches its max-imum (1). For the same reason, a rough membership function has its minimum (0) at the borders of the UAI.Vague intermediate qualitative values such as “between warm and cold”, “almost cold” or “not warm enough” candescribe the uncertainty in the boundary regions, or what is the same, vague qualitative values can be represented as the676M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685Fig. 6. The Rough Interval notation.superposition of two clearly defined intervals. By analyzing a particular value inside of these overlaps, the qualitativevalues corresponding to both intervals must be considered together with their complementary rough memberships.This enhances the precision and descriptive power of the model in the transition areas, where a higher degree of detailis usually required.For practical reasons a straight linear function is adopted to describe rough interval membership (Fig. 6, top).It not only satisfies all the conditions described above offering a trade-off among the infinite possibilities, but alsoimplies the lowest calculation and representation effort, which at the end results in a more efficient model processing.This linear representation of the probabilistic rough membership function corresponds to the assumption of a uniformprobability distribution, which is adopted, as a rule, as worse case scenario for the representation of systems underuncertainty, i.e. when no information about the probabilistic distribution of the modeled events is available.The separate representation of UAIs and LAIs makes evident the redundancy in this notation (shaded area inFig. 6). First, the empty spaces in the Lower Approximation Intervals coincide exactly with the overlapping of UpperApproximation Intervals. Second, the Rough Interval membership function can be totally reproduced from any of bothsegments, without further parameters. Hence, just the overlapping representation of the UAIs will be taken as notationfor the Rough Intervals, which is not different from the interval-based notation employed for qualitative modeling.The described representation and interpretation framework, based on the UAIs, could have been developed usingthe LAIs instead. However, the superposition of qualitative features (overlaps) is a notion that is closer to the humanunderstanding (e.g. “almost cold” can be understood as cold and warm at the same time) than representing featurelessempty areas with qualitative descriptors assigned ad hoc (“almost cold” (cid:8)= “neither cold, nor warm”). The chosenapproach, representing UAIs, allows handling Rough Intervals independently from their overlaps during the modeling.Overlaps emerge from the evaluation of a real situation based on the qualitative model.Indiscernibility [34], a property defined inside of the Rough Set Theory, allows the extraction of precise informationfrom vague concepts, by comparing these vague concepts with the available information about the problem. Basedon these properties Rough Intervals associate qualitative values to the different value ranges, as crisp intervals do.Furthermore, RI can represent the indiscernibility in the region between contiguous qualitative concepts, providing anew framework for the interpretation of interval-based qualitative models based on indiscernibility.The resulting crisp-interval-like notation is crucial for the integration of Rough Intervals in interval-based quali-tative methods. So represented, there is no difference between Rough Intervals and overlapping crisp intervals. Thisrepresentation assures a minimal impact with the introduction of the Rough Interval concept in interval-based mod-eling procedures. Qualitative models with crisp intervals and RIs are identical. Only the interval overlaps, which arenot permitted in the conventional interval-based qualitative methods, indicate the use of RIs.4. Qualitative computing with Rough IntervalsThe question: “how do a qualitative model profit from using RIs instead of common crisp intervals?” must beanswered for each particular qualitative modeling and reasoning approach separately. Section 5 makes a detailedanalysis of the use of RI in SQMA as case study. Similar analysis can be performed for other qualitative and hybridM. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685677techniques such as QSim, SQMD or Lunze’s Qualitative Automata. On the other hand, the utility of using RIs inqualitative models and reasoning based on these models must take into account the complexity of computing with RIand how difficult is their determination for a real problem. These two aspects (computing with RI and RI modeling)are addressed in the following sections in detail, taking the modeling and the operations with crisp intervals and fuzzysets as reference.4.1. Rough Interval arithmeticAs it was explained in Section 3.2, RIs can be completely represented in a qualitative model using only the UAIsbecause of the probabilistic complementarity of contiguous RIs. Nevertheless, computing with RI requires using everysingle RI isolated from other RIs in the same process variable. For this reason, each RI in a single-interval notation (asit is found in the model) must be changed to its equivalent double-interval notation before being used in arithmeticalor logical operations. This double-interval notation declares UAI and LAI of the Rough Interval explicitly, separatedby a colon (UAI : LAI).This extended RI notation made possible the definition of arithmetic RI operations based on Moore’s IntervalArithmetic [29]. The resulting Rough Interval Arithmetic (RIA) separates an arithmetic operation, such as additionor subtraction, into two identical interval operations. The first one operating over the UAIs and the second using thecorresponding LAI as operands. No attention must be paid to membership functions during these operations. Forexample, with the Rough Interval A = [4 9] : [5 8] and B = [2 8] : [4 6], the following operations can be performed:Addition: A + B = [4 9] : [5 8] + [2 8] : [4 6] = [4 + 2 9 + 8] : [5 + 4 8 + 6] = [6 17] : [9 14];Subtraction: B − A = [2 8] : [4 6] − [4 9] : [5 8] = [2 8] : [4 6] + [−9 −4] : [−8 −5] = [−7 4] : [−4 1];Negation: − A = −[4 9] : [5 8] = [−9 −4] : [−8 −5].Set and logic operations exploit the “set” nature of the Rough Intervals. The set operations unification, intersectionand complementation are defined for the RIA. The same analogies between set and logic operations while workingwith crisp intervals and fuzzy sets (AND ⇔ intersection; OR ⇔ unification; NOT ⇔ complement) can be translatedand adapted for RIs. For the unification of Rough Intervals no changes were introduced, since this operation coincideswith that defined for rough sets (see shaded area in Fig. 7(a) for A ∪ B).The complement of a Rough Interval must be clearly disjoined from the sign inversion operation (Negation),which regards the interval (not the set) nature of the Rough Intervals. To avoid notational ambiguity, as symbol forRI complement, its logical equivalent “¬ ” (NOT) is used instead of the traditional “−”, which remains consequentwith Moore’s interval arithmetic. The complement operation results in the set of all the elements in the universe ofdiscourse that are not contained in the RI introduced as argument for this operation. The shaded area in Fig. 7(c)shows the set ¬A.By the application of the intersection (compare with shaded area in Fig. 7(b) for A ∩ B), however, particularconditions may arise that require further definition. An arithmetic operation over one or two RIs must always result ina RI. However, the result of a RI intersection may not fulfill the defined notation conventions, as in the intersection ofA with the RI C = [3 5] : [4 4] in Fig. 8. A∩B produces a new RI [4 5] : [5 4] (see Fig. 8) with a maximum membershipof 0.5, and where the end of the LAI precedes its starting point. In this case, a maximum rough membership lowerthan one would denote that there is no certainty region about this concept. This kind of RI is called “Minor”. MinorFig. 7. Set operations in RAI.678M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685Fig. 8. RI intersection.RIs represent qualitative values or logic statements without 100% of certainty area, but that cannot be completelydiscarded.In general, a logic statement is TRUE (logic 1), if a non-empty RI can be found as result of the logic operationsthat describe this statement. An empty or non-existing RI would indicate that the logic expression is FALSE (logic 0).The effect of a minor RI resulting from an AND operation can be interpreted as a confidence between 0 and 1 fora TRUE result instead of a clear TRUE or FALSE. “Rough Interval confidence” is introduced here as the maximummembership value that can be reached within a minor RI. According to this definition, RI confidence is always 1 fornormal RIs. This value represents the “degree of truth” of the evaluated logic statement.Even though each arithmetic operation with RI must be performed twice (once with the UAIs and then with theLAIs), the single operations are not more complex than computing with crisp intervals. The same applies for logicand set operations. Only the final interpretation of the RI intersection was enhanced to accommodate the managementof vagueness and uncertainty through the definition of a confidence factor. However, as comparison, set and logicoperations with RI are simpler than the same operations with fuzzy sets. Fuzzy sets must handle continuous mem-bership functions and cannot take advantage of Moore’s interval calculus; in the way RIs do to reduce computationalcomplexity.4.2. Modeling of Rough IntervalsDetermining an adequate partitioning of the process variables is one of the most challenging tasks in buildinginterval-based qualitative models. This is also the case when Rough Intervals are to be used. Nonetheless, techniquesadapted from other areas such as Artificial Intelligence, probabilities and curve analysis can support the determinationof a basic set of Rough Intervals that can be then adapted to fit the problem requirements. Some approaches to RImodeling [26] are:(a) Heuristic definition of Rough Intervals. Determination of RI based on the interpretation of the variable accordingto the definitions of Upper and Lower Approximation Intervals. First, the different qualitative descriptors are sep-arately defined based on the available knowledge about the variable, as in the example of “warm” in Section 3.2.The resulting RIs, put together, define a sub optimal partitioning of the space of the variable (compare Fig. 6).(b) Experimental definition of Rough Intervals. In many applications, the knowledge about the process and processvariables is insufficient to allow the complete definition of RIs based on the previously described heuristic defini-tion. Assuming that some structural and behavioral information is available, the still-required knowledge about theprocess parameters may be gained through experimentation. This approach looks for “interesting points (pointsassociated with alarms, events or important changes in the process) using an approximate model of the system. Analternative modeling procedure is based on the concurrent simulation of the system behavior and ad-hoc definedmonitoring application. Initial values for RIs can be arbitrarily chosen and gradually tuned by trial and error [8,24].(c) Episodic interval identification. The Interval Identification method [7] can be adapted to support the identificationof Rough Intervals as well. It decomposes an experimental run of the system, where the input variable (the one tobe modeled) monotonically increases or decreases, into qualitative “episodes”. Episodes are defined through thecombination of the sign of the input variable, the sign of the system response and the first and second derivativesof this response. Those value areas of the variable where there is no change of episode would correspond to theM. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685679Table 3Comparison of qualitative representation principlesFuzzy subsetRough IntervalCrisp intervalRepresentation ofVaguenessVagueness and uncertaintyMembership functionsTrapezoid, Gaussian, sigmoid, . . .OverlapsNo restrictions or conditionsCross-dependencyEach set is defined independentlyCrisp In/Out discrimination with straightmembership in boundary reg.Mandatory total overlapping of boundaryregions, not allowed in LAIProbabilistic complementarityTotal membershipInterpretation(cid:4)μ > 1 allowed (Fuzziness)Membership or degrees of truth,possibility(cid:4)ρ = 1 at any point (Probability)Probability of being member of theintervalComputational/ measurementimprecisionCrisp In/Out discriminationsNot allowedNo overlaps and no empty spacesallowed(cid:4)m = 1 at any point (m ∈ {1, 0})Decision: inside or outside of theintervalsame interval. The undefined region between two stable sequences of episodes would correspond to the overlapof contiguous RIs.In general, Rough Intervals may be represented as two superposed intervals with straight lines in the boundary re-gions. So results a trapezoid, with the first interval, i.e. the UAI, as base. The second interval delimits the “lowerapproximation”, the region where the concept certainty is total. The terms “upper” and “lower” in Rough Intervals(and rough sets) are not used regarding their graphic representation. This trapezoid representation of RIs, however,is very similar to the one frequently used for fuzzy membership functions. An UAI in a Rough Interval would corre-spond to the “base” of the Fuzzy Interval, whereas the LAI corresponds to its “top” or “core”. A fourth approach forthe determination of Rough Intervals takes advantage of these similarities between fuzzy membership functions andRough Intervals.(d) Rough Intervals definition based on fuzzy set identification. Tools and methods, such as clustering and neuro-fuzzy approaches, have been developed for the identification of sub-optimal variable space partitions in fuzzyset applications, using sampled process data. Most of these concepts can be adapted for the determination ofRIs as well. Adaptation is required because the identification process must fulfill the particular features of RIs:First, fuzzy sets and membership functions are identified. Second, the membership functions of the fuzzy setsresulting from this first step are converted into trapezoid functions. Third, these trapezoid membership functionsare transformed into Rough Intervals, which assures that the resulting trapezoid covers the entire variable spaceand complies with characteristics of the RI overlapping [17] such as complementarity.Nonetheless, the described similarities of fuzzy sets and RI must not lead to confusion between both techniques.Table 3 summarizes some important characteristics and properties of Rough Intervals and compares them with thatof crisp intervals and the equivalent application of the membership of continuous variables to fuzzy subsets for theirqualitative representation.5. Case study: Situation-based qualitative modeling with Rough IntervalsThe previous sections made a general description of Rough Intervals and their application to the qualitative repre-sentation of continuous variables, using vague concepts such as “warm”, “far” or “low”. Now it is described the actualintegration of RIs in the interval-based qualitative modeling approach SQMA. This will support the evaluation of theeffect of using RIs, instead of crisp intervals, for the qualitative modeling of dynamic systems.5.1. Enhancing SQMA with Rough IntervalsThe Rough Interval concept is compatible with the interval-based information modeling and representation schemeused in SQMA. By modeling a component variable using RIs, i.e. declaring the RIs’ Upper Approximation Intervals,characterizes the complete variable space. SQMA processes UAIs, exactly as if they were crisp intervals, in order to680M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685produce component and system situation tables, as well as component and system transition matrices. The resultingmodel differs physically from ordinary SQMA models only in the overlaps between their declared intervals.Interval overlapping and membership functions enhance the information contents in SQMA models. A variabledefined over n Rough Intervals (which defines the size of the model) contains information distributed in n LAIsplus (n − 1) overlapping areas, i.e. in (2 ∗ n − 1) sections. Because each one of these (2 ∗ n − 1) sections can beindependently perceived and interpreted, the resulting model delivers almost twice as much information as an SQMAmodel using crisp intervals, which only can identify n different qualitative values. For instance, “Hot” (with ρ = 1),“Cold” (with ρ = 1) or both qualitative values simultaneously, with different but complementary ρ values, correspondto three different states. The third case could be described as “moderately Hot”, “between Hot and Warm” or “almostHot”, depending on the relationship between the membership values and given linguistic conventions. Vague linguisticexpressions can be used and generated from the model, which are closer to the human way of description.Another effect is the superposition of system situations in the model. As a result of the interval overlapping, mul-tiple situations with different, but complementary, membership values (ρ) appear, which describe transient systemconditions that otherwise would remain invisible in the qualitative model [25]. Eq. (6) shows the calculation of theglobal rough membership of a particular system situation (ρSIT) for a given transient system condition. ρSIT is com-puted as the multiplication of the rough membership of each process value (xi) in the described system condition toits corresponding RI (ρ(xi), compare Fig. 6, top). Based on the probabilistic interpretation of the rough membership,ρSIT would correspond to the compound probability of all the qualitative values that define the situation, taking placesimultaneously.(cid:5)ρSIT =ρ(xi).i(6)The following example illustrates the improvement in the descriptive power of SQMA models through the identifi-cation of multiple situations for each process state. Fig. 9 shows two possible SQMA descriptions of a given processstate. A single situation (top) results of using an SQMA model, where only crisp intervals are defined. At most, a plantoperator would interpret this information as: “The system is in a normal situation. The tank is filled with warm liquidand has nominal inflow and outflow”.The second table (Fig. 9, bottom) corresponds to an SQMA model with Rough Intervals. The membership valuesfor each situation are calculated using (6) for the following process condition:Inflow = 85 ml/sec → Nominal (ρ = 0.6); High (ρ = 0.4).Level = 50 cm → Filled (ρ = 1).Outflow = 70 ml/sec → Nominal (ρ = 1).Temperature = 56 ◦C → Warm (ρ = 0.7); Hot (ρ = 0.3).So results for Sit 134, for example, a membership value ρSIT = 0.6 ∗ 1.0 ∗ 1.0 ∗ 0.7 = 0.42. Now the same processstate could be described, based on the several identified situations, as: “The liquid filling the tank is moderately hot(between “Warm” and “Hot”). The tank inflow is a little high (between “High” and “Nominal”) while the outflow isnominal; the inflow is in any case greater than the outflow, therefore, the level is increasing. With that, the systemFig. 9. SQMA description of a process state with and without Rough Intervals.M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685681transits towards a dangerous state”. The descriptive power of the SQMA model using RIs is visibly superior to thatusing crisp intervals, even though the number of situations in both models (and consequently their sizes) is the same.The above-described property of qualitative models with RI also implies that it is possible to reduce the size ofthe model by keeping the original resolution. Each overlapping area can be precisely identified and handled in theSQMA model with RIs, which allows their interpretation as independent intervals. In consequence, the number ofintervals defined in a variable may be reduced, following the considerations presented at the beginning of this section,in a relation 0.5 ∗ (n + 1) : n without losing information in the model. That is, using RIs to describe a given processvariable can reduce the initial number of situations in a SQMA model to e.g. 2/3, 3/5 or 5/9 of the amount ofsituations it would have had, if the same variable would have been described with 3, 5 or 9 crisp intervals instead.This is an important size reduction for SQMA models, whose situation tables grow geometrically with the amountof intervals defined on the system’s variables. For the same case described in the previous paragraph, the initial SQMAmodel space (before validating against the situation rules) can be compressed to 4/9, 9/25 or 25/81 of its originalsize. The final ratio of model size reduction is a geometric function of how many variables are described with R andhow many intervals are defined on them. In general, assuming that the n crisp intervals in m process variables (forsimplification, assume also that these process variables are equally partitioned) are replace with (n + 1)/2 RIs, it canbe verified that:Limn→∞{new size} = 12m{original size}.(7)An analogous analysis can be made for the resolution increase by keeping the number of intervals, i.e. when a RIsubstitutes each crisp interval in a process variable. The model resolution can growth up to 2m (when n → ∞) theoriginal one, if m variables are expressed using RI. These two competing tendencies (size reduction and resolutionenhancement) originate two opposing ways of considering the employment of Rough Intervals. At the end, as in mostengineering solutions, the problem is reduced to a trade-off between both criteria.The situation membership (ρSIT) provides an important criterion to order, rank, classify or filter the deliveredinformation. However, ρSIT must not be understood only as a post-processing criterion. Using multiple situations withtheir respective ρ-values to represent a process state (as in Fig. 9, bottom) allow for a better simulation, monitoringand analysis of dynamic systems. The different situation membership values would continuously change in a time-varying system, in a direction, sense and magnitude, which corresponds to the system dynamics. Qualitative modelsbased on crisp intervals (e.g. Fig. 9, top) cannot deliver this kind of information.5.2. Spurious situations in the SQMA modelA consequence of using RI in SQMA is that some impossible situations may remain in the situation table aftercompleting the model. These spurious situations are component or system situations that are reachable according tothe model, but actually cannot take place in real systems. The adjective spurious denotes, in this case, situations thataccredit false descriptions to the real system state. Because of the RI notation, a situation is accepted if the UpperApproximation Intervals defined in this situation satisfy all the component or system rules. Since UAIs are biggerthan the equivalent crisp intervals, i.e. crisp intervals with limits in the midpoints of the overlaps, using RI results inthe acceptance of situations that the original SQMA method would reject.Analyzing the example of the system rule {T1.h = Valve.dp + T2.h} corresponding to the system Tank-Valve-Tankshown in Fig. 10, may help to the comprehension of this problem. T1.h and T2.h are the pressure heads in the outputof tanks T1 and T2 respectively, while Valve.dp corresponds to the pressure loss across Valve. The combinations ofthe intervals defined in these variables (Fig. 10, right) are validated against this rule, which results in the situationsshown in Table 4 (the last column, “Confidence” is described in the next section). No invalid interval combinationresulted from the rule evaluation (compare the sequence in the situation numbers).A variable partitioning using the equivalent crisp intervals results in the elimination of situations 4, 6, 7 and 9 (italicin Table 4). If their respective descriptions are considered, these four situations are impossible, for example situation6 claims the existence of water flowing from a tank with low level to a filled one, while situations 4 and 9 indicate thatthere is no flow between two tanks with different levels. Yet these four situations are not eliminated from the systemsituation table, because they satisfy the rule {T1.h = Valve.dp + T2.h} when evaluated with the UAIs of the definedRough Intervals.682M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685Fig. 10. The Tank-Valve-Tank system.Table 4Situation table for the system Tank-Valve-TankSit123456789101112T1.h[0 20][0 20][0 20][0 20][0 20][0 20](10 60](10 60](10 60](10 60](10 60](10 60]Valve.dp(−∞ 0)(−∞ 0)[0 0][0 0](0 ∞)(0 ∞)(−∞ 0)(−∞ 0)[0 0][0 0](0 ∞)(0 ∞)T2.h[0 20](10 60][0 20](10 60][0 20](10 60][0 20](10 60][0 20](10 60][0 20](10 60]Descriptionlow ← lowlow ← filledlow–lowlow–filledlow → lowlow → filledfilled ← lowfilled ← filledfilled–lowfilled–filledfilled → lowfilled → filledConfidence1110.510.50.510.5111Spurious situations appear because of the uncertainty inside of RI overlaps and the no determinism in the intervalequality operator (see end of Section 2.2) that is also present in Rough Interval Arithmetic. The combination ofthese two factors causes the SQMA modeling procedure to accept impossible situations during the rule verification.Setting intervals and reference values conveniently to avoid evaluating component rules in RI overlaps can resolvethis problem at component level. However, this is impossible with the system rules, because they are determinedautomatically during the modeling process. This demands enhancing the SQMA situation analysis at system level forthe reduction of spurious situations.5.3. Confident-based reduction of spurious situationsUsing Upper Approximation Intervals to represent RIs causes spurious situations to appear in the system situationtable. On the other hand, using Lower Approximation Intervals instead may cause the rejection of situations that areactually possible. A rule evaluation against LAIs should result in less than or, at most, the same number of situationsresulting from evaluating the equivalent crisp intervals. A trade-off between these two extreme cases is developedbased on the RI intersection (see Section 4.1), which is always in SQMA the operation closing the evaluation of arule. Fig. 11 shows the three possible outcomes for this operation:– The RI intersection does not exist (top-left).– The intersection exists and delivers a conventional RI (top-right).– The intersection exits, but delivers a minor RI (bottom).The maximum value reachable by the corresponding membership functions is therefore: exactly zero, exactly oneor a value in between (one and zero excluded) respectively. This value can express the confidence in the satisfactionof the rule evaluated with the RI intersection:M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685683Fig. 11. Confidence-based rule evaluation with RI.– Maximum membership value is zero ⇒ the rule is not fulfilled.– Maximum membership value is one ⇒ the rule is fulfilled.– Maximum membership value in between ⇒ no direct decision is possible.The third case results in a number between zero and one, which is proportional to the confidence in the fulfillmentof the rule by the corresponding situation. This value is called rule confidence (C), and is defined as the maximummembership value in the Rough Interval intersection that determines the verification of this rule for the current situ-ation. Rule confidence is a value between zero and one, where C = 0 denotes an empty RI (no intersection), C = 1a trapezoidal RI and C ∈ (01) a minor RI.By using rule confidence, it is possible to define thresholds to decide, during the situation validation process,whether a given rule is fulfilled or not. This enables the reduction of spurious situations in the SQMA model. Resum-ing the example of the Tank-Valve-Tank system, a confidence C = 0.5 results from the rule evaluation with situation 9(s. Table 4, last column). This is a triangular RI with a maximum value of 0.5 (compare the intersections in Fig. 11,bottom). Establishing C > 0.3 as acceptance criterion for the rule validation would determine its acceptance. Thisminimum confidence value required for accepting a rule is called C_req. The example in Fig. 11, bottom-right cor-responds in consequence to defining C_req = 0.3. On the contrary, this situation must be eliminated from the model,if a confidence higher than 0.5, e.g. C > 0.8, is demanded (compare Fig. 11, bottom-left, C_req = 0.8). The sameanalysis is also applicable to situations 4, 6 and 7. Establishing the rejection of any situation with a confidence under0.5 (C_req = 0.5) would result in a system situation table similar to the one resulting from using equivalent crispintervals for the tank levels, i.e. without situations 4, 6, 7 and 9.Eliminating situations with a small confidence value reduces the spurious situations in the situation table. Thisreduces the size of the SQMA model and supports a better interpretation of process states by avoiding conceptualinconsistencies in situation remarks such as “liquid flowing from a tank with low level to a filled one” in situations 6and 7 of the Tank-Valve-Tank system. But how can an adequate value be determined for C_req? The answer to thisquestion can be supported on the fact that the total membership of any particular value of a variable to the RIs definedfor this variable must be equal to one. This rule arises from the total probability condition for complementary eventsand must be fulfilled even inside of the overlaps between two RIs. Hence, there exists a complementarity condition(see Section 3.2) between the membership values of a given point to the two RIs in the overlap: the probability ofbeing part of one RI or the other must be one. So, if situations resulting with a confidence lower than 0.5 (or any C_requnder 0.5) are eliminated during the situation validation, there must always exist at least one complementary situationthat represents the current process state better than the one eliminated.Another approach to explain the effect of C_req on the validation process is based on the α-cut operation. Nguyen([14] cited by [1]) proved that by computing the value of a fuzzy mapping, a generic h-level α-cut of the resulting setonly depends on the h-level α-cuts of the arguments:yh = F (x1, x2, . . . , xn)h = F (x1h, x2h, . . . , xnh)(8)684M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685where a h-level α-cut (with 0 (cid:3) h (cid:3) 1) of a fuzzy set A is the crisp set (the interval) Ah of all x ∈ A with a fuzzymembership value greater than, or equal to, h. Consequently, any algebraic computation may be decomposed intoseveral interval computations, each one having as arguments the α-cut intervals of the fuzzy arguments at the samelevel. The result is the α-cut of the original fuzzy result. The fuzzy calculus problem is then simplified to intervalcalculus.Since RIs and trapezoidal fuzzy sets share the same shape and basic operations, this principle can be applied toRIs operations. Consequently, eliminating situations with a confidence C < C_req during the situation validation isthe same as eliminating those situations where the C_req-level α-cut of the RI resulting from the last intersectionoperation is an empty interval. Considering the SQMA situation validation as function F in Eq. (8), and the RIscomposing the evaluated situation as its arguments x1 to xn, the same spurious situations can be filtered based on theC_req-level α-cut of the RIs and interval arithmetic. For this reason, the equivalent crisp intervals introduced in lastsection deliver the same result as eliminating spurious situations with C_req = 0.5.Choosing C_req > 0.5 (e.g. C_req = 0.8) would deliver non-intersecting intervals after applying the α-cut. Thereare in fact gaps between these intervals. These gaps cause possible situations not being considered at all. Thus, choos-ing a C_req value greater than 0.5 violates the completeness of SQMA models. On the contrary, a conservative C_reqbetween 0.5 and zero produces overlapping crisp intervals. The solution provided by these overlapping intervals isnot optimal, but preserves the completeness of the SQMA model. In general, a reasonable threshold value for the ruleconfidence (C_req) would vary between 0.3 and 0.5.6. ConclusionsThis article introduced a new concept for the qualitative modeling of complex systems, which is based on the rep-resentation and handling of vague and uncertain information in interval-based methods. The management of vagueand uncertain information enhances the relation size/precision and the descriptive power of the resulting qualitativemodels, improving their applicability. Principles taken from Pawlak’s Rough Set Theory are employed for the rep-resentation of vague and uncertain knowledge in the original interval-based notation. The resulting Rough Intervalconcept enhances the resolution of the representation of dynamic systems without increasing the size of the models,or what is equivalent, allows compressing qualitative models without losing resolution.A further pay-off of Rough Intervals is that thanks to the introduction of a rough membership function, it is nowpossible to identify and characterize process transitions precisely. This enables at least rough probability judgments.The uniformity assumption by the selection of the straight membership function may or may not be realistic forparticular process plants, but it is still a better starting point than the probability-free estimates provided in interval-based qualitative models, particularly when no probabilistic information about the system behavior is available.The new concept was successfully integrated in the Situation-based Qualitative Modeling and Analysis method. Itallowed the integration of vague and uncertain process knowledge into SQMA models, taking advantage of the richinformation hidden in the human way of perceiving and describing nature. This improved the precision and compact-ness of SQMA models, compared to the conventional technique based on crisp intervals. However, the introductionof vague and uncertain information causes the appearance of spurious situations in the model, which must be con-veniently filtered out to assure the targeted model compactness. SQMA models using Rough Intervals have beensuccessfully employed in online process monitoring and fault detection applications [21,27].References[1] A. Bonarini, G. Bontempi, A qualitative simulation approach for fuzzy dynamical models, ACM Transactions on Modeling and ComputerSimulation 4 (4) (1994) 285–313.[2] A. Grzesiak, Analysis of the applicability of SQMA to fault analysis, Diplomarbeit, IAS, Universität Stuttgart, Germany, 2003.[3] B. Kuipers, Qualitative simulation, Artificial Intelligence 29 (1986) 289–338.[4] D. Dubois, H. Prade, J. Lang, Possibilistic logic, in: D. Gabbay, et al. (Eds.), Handbook of Logic in Artificial Intelligence and Logic Program-ming, vol. 3, Oxford University Press, USA, 1994, pp. 439–514.[5] D. Dvorak, B. Kuipers, Process monitoring and diagnosis: A model-based approach, IEEE Expert 6 (3) (1991) 67–74.[6] D. Dvorak, Monitoring and diagnosis of continuous dynamic systems using semiquantitative simulation, PhD dissertation, University of Texas,Austin, TX, USA, 1992.[7] D. Schaich, R. King, U. Keller, M. Chantler, Interval identification—a modelling and design technique for dynamic systems, in: 13th Interna-tional Workshop of Qualitative Reasoning, Loch Awe Scotland, June, 1999.M. Rebolledo / Artificial Intelligence 170 (2006) 667–685685[8] F. Berlin, Integration von Fuzzy-Intervallen in die qualitative Modellierungssprache SQMA, Diplomarbeit, IAS, Universität Stuttgart, Ger-many, 2002.[9] F. Tay, L. Shen, Fault diagnosis based on rough set theory, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (1) (2003) 39–43.[10] G. Brajnik, M. Lines, Qualitative modeling and simulation of socio-economic phenomena, Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simula-tion 1 (1) (1998).[11] G. Coghill, S. Garrett, R. King, Learning qualitative metabolic models, in: Proceedings of the European Conference on Artificial Intelligence—ECAI’04, Valencia, Spain, 2004.[12] G. Mayer, Development of a method concept for increasing the reliability of software-intensive systems in early development phases, Diplo-marbeit, IAS, Universität Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, 2004.[13] H. Kay, B. Rinner, B. Kuipers, Semi-quantitative system identification, Artificial Intelligence 119 (1–2) (2000) 103–140.[14] H. Nguyen, A note on the extension principle for fuzzy sets, Journal of Mathematical Analysis Applications 64 (1978) 369–380.[15] J. de Kleer, J. Brown, A qualitative physics based on confluences, Artificial Intelligence 24 (1–3) (1984) 7–83.[16] J. Lunze, Qualitative modelling of dynamical systems: Motivation, methods, and prospective applications, Mathematics and Computers inSimulation 46 (5–6) (1998) 465–483.[17] J. Wille, Development of a concept for the experimental determination of Rough Intervals, Diplomarbeit, IAS, Universität Stuttgart, Germany,2003.[18] K. Forbus, Qualitative process theory, Artificial Intelligence 24 (1–3) (1984) 85–168.[19] K. Forbus, Qualitative process theory: twelve years after, Artificial Intelligence 59 (1–2) (1993) 115–123.[20] K. Forbus, P. Whalley, J. Everett, L. Ureel, M. Brokowski, J. Baher, S. Kuehne, CyclePad: An articulate virtual laboratory for engineeringthermodynamics, Artificial Intelligence 114 (1–2) (1999) 297–347.[21] L. Cachero, Online probabilistic forecasting in a three tanks system, Master Thesis, IAS, Universität Stuttgart, Germany, 2003.[22] L. Shen, F. Tay, L. Qu, Y. Shen, Fault diagnosis using rough sets theory, Computers in Industry 43 (2000) 61–72.[23] L. Zadeh, Fuzzy sets, Information and Control 8 (1965) 338–353.[24] M. Rebolledo, Development of a concept for the handling of vagueness in the SQMA modeling approach, Special Project, IAS, UniversitätStuttgart, Germany, 2002.[25] M. Rebolledo, A combined rough-stochastic approach to process monitoring based on qualitative models, in: IASTED International Confer-ence on Intelligent Systems and Control, Salzburg, Austria, 2003, pp. 69–74.[26] M. Rebolledo, Situation-based process monitoring in complex systems considering vagueness and uncertainty, PhD Thesis, UniversitätStuttgart, Germany, 2004.[27] P. Katamaneni, Online process supervision of a three tank system, Master Thesis, IAS, Universität Stuttgart, Germany, 2003.[28] Q. Shen, R. Leitch, Fuzzy qualitative simulation, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 23 (4) (1993) 1038–1060.[29] R. Moore, Interval Analysis, Prentice-Hall, Englewood-Cliffs, NJ, 1966.[30] S. Manz, Online fault detection and diagnosis of complex systems based on hybrid component models, in: Proceedings of the 14th InternationalCongress on Condition Monitoring and Diagnostic Engineering Management—COMADEM 2001, Manchester, UK, 2001, pp. 865–872.[31] U. Biegert, Computer-aided safety analysis of computer-controlled systems: A case example, in: Proceedings of the 6th IEEE InternationalConference on Methods and Models in Automation and Robotics (MMAR), Miedzyzdroje, Poland, 2000, pp. 777–782.[32] U. Keller, T. Wyatt, R. Leitch, FrenSi—a fuzzy qualitative simulation method, in: Proceedings of the MISC Workshop on Application ofInterval Analysis to System and Control, Girona, Spain, 1999.[33] X. Laufenberg, P. Fröhlich, A qualitative model based approach to integrate system and hazard analysis, in: Proceedings of the IFAC Sympo-sium on Fault Detection, Supervision and Safety for Technical Processes—SAFEPROCESS 94, Helsinki, Finland, 1994.[34] Z. Pawlak, Rough sets: A new approach to vagueness, in: L. Zadeh, J. Kacprzyk (Eds.), Fuzzy Logic for the Management of Uncertainty,Whiley Professional Computing, USA, 1982, pp. 105–118.[35] Z. Pawlak, Rough sets, rough relations and rough functions, ICS Research Report 24/94, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, 1994.