Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103Contents lists available at ScienceDirectArtificial Intelligencewww.elsevier.com/locate/artintTeaming up humans with autonomous synthetic charactersRui Prada∗, Ana PaivaIST-Technical University of Lisbon and INESC-ID, Avenida Prof. Cavaco Silva – Taguspark, 2744-016 Porto Salvo, Portugala r t i c l ei n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:Received 3 August 2007Received in revised form 17 August 2008Accepted 24 August 2008Available online 7 September 2008Keywords:Group dynamicsTeamworkSocial intelligenceAutonomous synthetic charactersBelievabilityComputer–human interactionAutonomous synthetic characters have the potential to promote the social engagement ofusers in virtual environments, enhancing their interaction experience. In computer games,for example, poor interaction with game characters can drastically detract from the gamingexperience, making the design of autonomous synthetic characters an important issue. Inparticular, in Role Playing Games (RPGs), for example, users and autonomous charactersoften perform in a group. Usually, the role of such characters is very limited since theylack the social skills to perform coherently in group scenarios.The goal of the work presented here is to endow autonomous synthetic characters withsocial skills that allow them to perform in groups with human members. However, tosuccessfully achieve this, it is not enough to assure that the characters behave in a coherentmanner from an individual perspective or that they are able to perform the group taskoptimally. It is also necessary that the autonomous characters exhibit behaviours that arecoherent with the group’s composition, context and structure.For this reason, we have developed a model to support group dynamics of autonomousinspired by theories developed in human socialsynthetic characters (SGD model)psychological sciences. This model defines the knowledge that each individual should buildabout the others and the group, and how this knowledge drives their interactions. Themodel was used in a collaborative computer game that was tested with users. The resultsshowed that the model had a positive effect on the users’ social engagement, namely, ontheir trust and identification with the group.© 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionThe creation of autonomous synthetic characters has been widely studied in the past years, especially because such char-acters can improve the interaction of users with virtual environments [7]. For this reason, autonomous synthetic charactershave been used in several different domains such as entertainment [11,45], business [9] and education [59,65]. They havebeen particularly important in computer games that make use of narrative, such as Role Playing Games (RPGs), because theyconstitute the main driving force to create successful narrative experiences that improve gameplay [39,66].The crucial issue in designing autonomous synthetic characters is making them believable or creating the “illusion oflife” for the user [8]. In other words, autonomous synthetic characters must be coherent with the users’ expectations.The work presented here focuses on believability issues of autonomous synthetic characters when they interact as agroup. The work is focused on groups with few members (small groups) who are committed to a collaborative task andwithout a strong organisational structure. Thus, we are not concerned with large groups such as crowds or complex societies.In addition, our goal is to engage the user as an active member of the group.* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: rui.prada@gaips.inesc-id.pt (R. Prada), ana.paiva@gaips.inesc-id.pt (A. Paiva).0004-3702/$ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2008.08.006R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–10381Typically, autonomous characters lack the necessary social skills to interact in a group. Therefore, their role in the groupis very restricted, and their autonomy is limited. For example, in RPGs, the autonomous characters only take secondaryroles, such as a salesperson, while the main characters are controlled by the user.Moreover, most of the studies conducted on the believability of autonomous synthetic characters are focused on theinteractions of a single user with a single character [9,57]. However, in group scenarios, it is not enough to ensure that thecharacters behave in a coherent manner from an individual perspective; it is also necessary that they exhibit behaviours thatare coherent with the group’s composition, context and structure. On the other hand, approaches to create team-orientedautonomous agents focus primarily on the optimal results of the group [46,70,77]. Although the group’s performance mayaffect the experience of users when interacting in a group, their perception about their experience is highly influenced bytheir social identification and their trust of the group [3,22]. In fact, these two factors are closely related to the satisfactionof people in group interactions [4].In order to achieve such an experience and properly engage users with the group, we argue that autonomous members’behaviours cannot be solely driven by their need to solve the task but also by the socio-emotional dimensions of the group,such as the structure of interpersonal relations.To prove this, we have developed a model for group dynamics (SGD model) that allows each individual character toreason about other characters and the group. This model was inspired by theories developed in human social psychologicalsciences and is driven by a characterisation of the different types of interactions that may occur in the group, taking intoaccount the socio-emotional interactions as well as the task-related ones.We have implemented the model into the behaviour of autonomous synthetic characters that collaborate with the userin the resolution of tasks within a virtual environment (a collaborative game). This game was developed with the purposeof testing the effects of our model in users’ interaction experiences. The results of the experiment showed that the modelhad a positive effect on the users’ trust and social identification with the group.This paper is organised as follows. First, we discuss related work concerning the interaction of autonomous characters in agroup. Then, we present the fundamentals of group dynamics on which we grounded our model followed by the descriptionof the model itself. Then, we describe the computer game that we developed to test our model and the experiment thatwas conducted to assess the effects of the model in the users’ interaction experience. We finish with some conclusions andcomments regarding future work.2. Related workThe problem of multiple autonomous synthetic agents that interact in a group has been previously addressed by severalresearchers. The focus of their approaches can be seen in two different perspectives: (1) centred on believability issues ofthe group interactions or (2) centred on the efficiency of the group’s performance. We will briefly describe some of themost relevant work and make some comments regarding the focus of the work presented in this paper.The first example of the first perspective can be found in Reynolds’ Boids [63], which implements a flocking behaviour ina group of flying creatures. In the same line of work, we can additionally find research concerning the generation of crowds[53] that is often used in commercial systems for film creation. One well-known example of this is “The Lord of the Rings”film trilogy [54], which includes numerous fighting scenes involving armies of thousands of warriors, most of these beingplayed by synthetic actors generated by the MASSIVE1 platform.The Boids’ flocking behaviour and crowd generation make use of emergent group dynamics and result in a believablelife-like group behaviour. However, agents in these examples do not have deep social awareness and lack the ability to buildsocial relations, which we believe to be essential for the interaction with a user. In addition, these groups do not have anexplicit common goal.Guye-Vuilleme [28] has extended the work on the generation of the behaviour of crowds by introducing a model for thesimulation of the movement and interaction of individuals driven by the group’s social context. This includes behavioursfor social avoidance of collisions, social approach and the calculation of suitable interaction distances and angles. The socialcontext consists of a model of interpersonal relationships of individuals. Although incorporating interpersonal relations toinfluence the autonomous characters’ behaviours, Guye-Vuilleme’s crowds cannot be seen as performing teamwork, sincethey do not have an explicit collaborative task.Another example is the AlphaWolf [71] system, which simulates the behaviour of a pack of six grey wolves. In thissystem, the different synthetic characters are able to build domination-submission relationships. These relations are builtin the form of emotional memories that drive the characters’ behaviour. In addition, three users can interact with thesystem and influence the behaviour of three of the wolves. AlphaWolf has successfully implemented a believable simulationof group interactions in a pack of wolves, and it has engaged the user in such interactions. However, the user and thesynthetic characters do not engage in the resolution of a collaborative task and do not have a strong notion of group.Schmitt and Rist [67] developed a model of virtual group dynamics for small group negotiations. In their system, usersdelegate the task of scheduling their appointment meetings to a virtual agent. The agents will later meet in an arena andnegotiate the times and dates of the meetings. Each agent has an individual personality and builds social attraction relations1 For more details on MASSIVE, please check http://www.massivesoftware.com.82R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103with the others. These relations and personality guide the agents’ interactions and support the generation of the negotiationdialogues. In the end, the dialogues are played for the users by a cast of synthetic characters. The believability of the groupdynamics is a key factor in this example as it supports the believability of the agents’ dialogues, but users do not directlyengage in the group interactions. In addition, the social relationships are limited to like and dislike attitudes, disregardingthe dimension of social power that is inherent to human social interactions [14]. Nevertheless, this research enhances thefact that interpersonal relationships have a key role in the achievement of believable group interactions.This role was also stressed by Reilly and Bates [62] in their work on natural negotiation of believable agents. Theyhave built two autonomous characters, Melvin and Sluggo, that negotiate with a user in a simulated playground for tradingbaseball cards. The interpersonal relationships affect characters’ negotiation responses and proposals. For example, a char-acter may decide to only make proposals to friends. In turn, the negotiation influences interpersonal relationships. If Melvinbelieves that the user is a friend, but s/he deceives him, he will no longer consider the user a friend, impacting futurenegotiations. Melvin and Sluggo interact with a user in a believable way using their ability to establish relationships, as wellas personality and emotions, but they do not engage in a collaborative task.PsychSim by Marsella and Pynadath [44,60] addresses some issues regarding the dynamics of social influence. PsychSimis an agent-based modelling tool that allows an end-user to quickly construct a social scenario, where a diverse set ofentities, either groups or individuals, interact and communicate among themselves. Furthermore, each entity has its owngoals, relationships (e.g., friendship, hostility, authority) with other entities, private beliefs and mental models about otherentities. Then, based on the scenario specified, the tool simulates the social dynamics by generating the behaviour of allthe entities. In addition, it provides explanations of the result of the simulation in terms of each entity’s goals and beliefs.The simulation is based on a model of influence grounded on the effects of communication and a recursive theory of mind.PsychSim is a powerful social simulation tool that aims to generate believable behaviour of autonomous agents, which mayinteract in a group. However, there is no space for user interaction within the simulation and, therefore, no user integrationin such groups. Nevertheless, this system enhances the importance of a theory of mind to achieve deep social believability,following Castelfranchi’s thesis on the need of mind-reading agents for social action [17].Approaches centred on the efficiency of the group’s performance are more common. At their core are theories of JointIntentions [18] and theories of Shared Plans [27], which were incorporated by Tambe in STEAM (a Shell for TEAMwork) [70].STEAM is a hybrid teamwork model that borrows strengths from both theories. Teamwork in STEAM is based on the agents’building up a hierarchy of joint intentions and monitoring other members’ and team’s performances and reorganising thehierarchy when necessary. Furthermore, STEAM takes into account the costs of communications to reduce “non-necessarycommunications” that would affect team performance. STEAM only deals with autonomous agents and does not includehuman members in the group. In addition, it is focused on the optimal performance of the group, disregarding interpersonalrelations.Carley and Lin [12,13] have studied computational models of organisations using agent-based approaches. They havedeveloped a framework CORP (Computational ORganisational Performance) that defines organisations as complex adaptivesystems composed of intelligent, task-oriented, boundedly-rational [69] and socially-situated agents. CORP simulates a seriesof distributed decision-making problems and the coordination in and between organisations taking into account organisa-tional processes, individual experiences and the environment of the task. CORP has been used as a testbed for organisationaldesign applied to crisis management. Like STEAM, CORP is focused on the efficiency of the performance of the group anduses a strong organisational structure that does not apply to small groups.STEVE (Soar Training Expert for Virtual Environments) [65] is an example of a system that simultaneously handles the ef-ficiency of task performance and the believability of the interactions with a user. STEVE is an ECA (Embodied ConversationalAgent) [15] used in a navy facility to train a team to solve possible malfunctions that may arise in a ship. The team canbe composed of several human users and several autonomous characters, which interact in a 3D virtual environment thatsimulates the ship and its equipment. However, STEVE’s concerns regarding believability are mostly centred on the com-munication acts (e.g., STEVE is made believable by using proper deictic gestures and gaze). Furthermore, the interactionsbetween the group members are all related to the task, without the possibility for deeper social engagement.Furthermore, computer RPGs, such as “Star Wars: The Knights of the Old Republic” [10] or “The Temple of Elemental Evil”[72], are systems that engage the users in a group with autonomous synthetic characters that perform a collaborative task.In this type of game, the social interactions are an important part of the game, especially those that take place betweenthe members of the group. Since the social skills of the autonomous characters are usually weak, they only perform simpleroles and are not deeply involved in the group task. More recent games, such as “Neverwinter Nights 2” [56], have includedsome interpersonal relationship dynamics in the group of characters that follow the user, but these are still very shallow. In“Neverwinter Nights 2”, the relationships are unidirectional and unidimensional. Worst of all, the characters only relate tothe user’s character and not to each other. Nevertheless, this effort shows the interest of the game developer community increating better dynamics of group behaviour.Mateas and Stern [47], as well as Evans and Lamb [23], have created tools for the specification of group behavioursand activities in order to help developers define coordinated behaviours for multiple characters. However, these tools re-quire developers to explicitly specify, through primitive actions, all the dynamics of the behaviour. Besides needing a lot ofauthoring effort, this may lead to little space for emergence, one of the main characteristics of social dynamics [17].Other examples of group dynamics in computer games can be found in First Person Shooters (FPSs) such as “Half Life”[73]. In these games, the player faces groups of enemies that apply squad tactics [64,74,75] to challenge the player effec-R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–10383tively. This squad behaviour has successfully increased the entertainment value of FPSs by making the autonomous squadsa stronger challenge, but it does not handle the user participation in the group and is merely focused on the efficiency ofthe group interactions.3. Fundamentals of group dynamicsFrom the examples above, we see that prior research conducted on the interaction of autonomous characters in a grouphas addressed the issues of emergent behaviour, collaborative tasks, and user interaction separately, but seldom together.Our work addresses all three issues. The goal is to create a group simultaneously constituted of autonomous synthetic char-acters and users who are engaged in the resolution of a collaborative task. The synthetic characters act as active members ofthe group. Thus, the group’s emergent behaviour must be believable and coherent with the user’s expectations. The group’sinteractions should follow dynamics that are similar to the user’s experience in human groups. To create the behaviour ofthe autonomous characters, we have developed a model supported by some studies and theories of group dynamics devel-oped in human social psychological sciences. In this section, we describe those theories and studies that contributed mostfor the development of the model.3.1. The definition of groupWe found that it is not easy to clearly distinguish a collection of people from a group of people. Groups may emerge inmany different social contexts and have many different types of interactions. Nevertheless, several definitions, restricted bycontext, have been proposed [14,30,50]. Group definitions are in general based on the notions of interaction, interdependencyand mutual perception and identification:• Interaction: A group of people interact frequently. Those interactions are relevant for the group members and followthe context of the group.• Interdependency: The members of a group have some interdependency, which means that one member’s behaviouraffects the other members.• Mutual perception and identification: All members of a group perceive the group. They can identify the group, itsmembers and recognise that they belong to the group themselves.McGrath [50] proposed an interesting and different definition inspired by the mathematical notion of fuzzy sets thatdefines a group in terms of degree of groupness. This definition is very flexible given that every collection of people is apotential group. The degree of groupness is influenced by four factors: (1) the number of members in the group, (2) thelevel of interactions between the members, (3) the history of interactions and (4) the probability of future interactions ofthe group. The same approach is used in the notion of member of a group. Each individual can belong to several groupshaving, in each, a different degree of belongingness.3.2. The group’s processThe term group dynamics was first introduced by Kurt Lewin [37,38] in studies he conducted between 1939 and 1946.From these studies, he formulated the field theory, known as the first group dynamics theory. After the publication ofLewin’s studies, many other researchers focused their work on the study of group processes and dynamics. Consequently,several different theories on group dynamics emerged. In 1968, Cartwright and Zander [14] reviewed the theories that con-tributed most to group dynamics development and divided them into several categories depending on focus. Our approachto modelling group dynamics of synthetic characters mainly follows theories that Cartwright and Zander classified as Systemand Interaction theories. Nevertheless, we also include several ideas from other perspectives such as Sociometry and CognitiveTheories.In the perspective of System and Interaction theories, the group process is composed of a set of interaction processesthat occur during an interval of time t = [t1, t2] (see Fig. 1). The interaction processes are affected by preceding factorsthat are present at time t1 and result in some consequences at time t2. McGrath and others [29,49,50] have studied thegroup process using this perspective and have defined and classified preceding factors, interaction processes and theirconsequences:• Preceding factors: variables that influence the interaction processes; they can be categorised in three different dimen-sions:1. Individual level: these factors are related to the individual characteristics of each member of the group. They includethe individual capabilities and skills, the attitude and motivation and other demographic and biographic traits.2. Group level: these factors relate to the group topology. They include the size of the group, its composition, its hi-erarchy structure, the distribution of influence and power, the role of each member and the organisation of thecommunication, along with other sociometric factors.84R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103Fig. 1. The group as a system of interacting members with observable inputs and outputs.Table 1Bales IPA system of categoriesTypeSocio-EmotionalPositiveInstrumentalActiveInstrumentalPassiveSocio-EmotionalNegativeCategories1. Seem Friendly2. Release Tension3. Agree4. Give Suggestion5. Give Opinion6. Give Information7. Ask for Information8. Ask for Opinion9. Ask for Suggestion10. Disagree11. Show Tension12. Seem Unfriendly3. Context level: these factors are associated with the nature of the task and the environment where it must be per-formed. Additional context factors, like inter-group relations and social and cultural factors, are also considered.• Interaction processes: are the interactions and exchanges that occur between the members of the group.• Consequences: the interaction processes have consequences that change the situation that was initially verified whenthe processes first began. These changes occur at three different levels:1. Individual level: results that affect the individual members. For example, the individual social condition can changeand be facilitated. Furthermore, individuals’ attitudes and motivation within the group may also change.2. Group level: results that change the group topology. The group’s structure may change or even emerge if the groupwas not previously structured. The distribution of influence and power can be modified resulting, for example, inchanges in the leadership.3. Context level: results in the task level. The task efficiency and execution can change.3.3. The interactionsThe first studies regarding the interaction processes within a group are due to Bales and his associates [6]. They devel-oped the Interaction Process Analysis (IPA), a method for group analysis based on the observation of the interactions thatoccur between the members of a group. Based on his studies, Bales concluded that a group, in its process, faces two dif-ferent classes of problems: instrumental problems related to the task, and socio-emotional problems related to the social andemotional relations of the members. Bales proposed two major categories of interactions: the instrumental interactions andthe socio-emotional ones. Furthermore, the instrumental interactions are divided into active interactions, when the membersgive information to the others, and passive interactions, when the members request information. In turn, the socio-emotionalinteractions are divided into positive or negative interactions as they raise positive or negative socio-emotional responses bythe members.The IPA system proposes twelve categories for the possible interactions that occur between the members of a groupthroughout its process. Table 1 shows the IPA categories and their classification according to the type of problems that theyrelate to (instrumental or socio-emotional).3.4. The group’s structureOne of the main factors that influences the way members in a group interact is the group’s structure, which is usuallydivided into several different dimensions. The most common dimensions, according to Jesuíno [34], are:• the structure of communication, which reflects the communication network that connects the group members,• the structure of social power, which reflects the social influence that members may exert on each other,• and the structure of social attraction (or sociometric structure), which reflects the social attraction that members feel foreach other.R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–10385Furthermore, according to Collins and Raven [19], the structure of a group can be characterised in terms of the inter-personal relations established between its members. This means that the interpersonal relations of social power are relatedto the emergence of the group’s structure of social power, while the interpersonal relations of social attraction are relatedto the emergence of the group’s structure of social attraction. Therefore, in order to understand the dynamics of the group’sstructure and its interactions, it is imperative to understand the dynamics of the interpersonal social relations.3.4.1. Relations of social powerFrench and Raven [24] defined the notion of social power as the influence exerted by a social agent on a person, wherethe social agent can be another person, a social role, a norm, a group or part of a group. This influence is defined in termsof the psychological change on the person’s perceptions, emotions and behaviours that can be attributed to the action ofthe social agent.However, social power only defines a potential influence on the person. On one hand, the person may mobilise someeffort to resist that influence. On the other hand, the social agent may decide to use less than his full power in the influenceprocess. Therefore, the social influence exerted on a person results from the strength of the power that the social agentinduces reduced by the strength of the resistance mobilised by the person.Furthermore, French and Raven [24,61] have proposed a characterisation of power according to its social source and therelation between the person and the social agent:1. Reward Power: based on the perceived ability to mediate rewards.2. Coercive Power: based on the perceived ability to mediate punishments.3. Legitimate Power: sometimes referred to as organisational authority, it is based on the perception that someone hasthe right to prescribe given behaviours.4. Referent Power: based on perceived associations between the person and the social agent, for example, due to anaffective relationship.5. Expert Power: based on the perceived distinctive knowledge, expertness, abilities or skills attributed to the social agent.6. Information Power: based on the perceived control of the information needed in order to reach an important goal.These different types of social power are interrelated and are often combined in the process of social influence. Forexample, a speaker of renown and expertise in a given field may influence the opinion of a listener using the expert power.However, if the listener dislikes the speaker, this influence will be reduced by a negative referent power.In addition, the process of influence depends on the perception of the person being influenced. For example, if a memberis attached to a group and he conforms to its norms only because he fears to be ridiculed or expelled from the group, heis influenced by coercive power. However, if he conforms in order to obtain praise, he is influenced by reward power.Furthermore, if the member conforms to avoid discomfort or gain satisfaction independently of the group’s responses, heis influenced by referent power. Finally, if the member conforms with the majority’s opinion based on the respect for thecollective wisdom of the group, then he is influenced by expert power.The perception of power also has effects on the group process. For example, according to Hurwitz et al. [33] and Lippittet al. [40], the members of a group with higher social power are usually more appreciated by the rest of the group and theirinteractions are more likely to drive the group’s behaviour. In addition, they are more attracted to the group and are moresatisfied with the group’s interactions. They also tend to underestimate the efforts of the members that have less influenceon the group and to use their power on them as a way of self assertion [35,36].3.4.2. Relations of social attractionThe relations of social attraction, first studied by Moreno [52], define the affective attitude of each member of the grouptowards the other members. This attitude reflects the affective ties that each member establishes with the others, which canbe either positive or negative. This interpersonal attraction is not necessarily reciprocal. For example, if person A is positivelyattracted to person B, this does not necessarily mean that person B is positively attracted to person A. Nevertheless, someresults show that reciprocity in interpersonal attraction relations is often a reality and that it is an important factor for thedevelopment of strong social attraction ties [21,55].In addition, the relations of social attraction in a group tend to be balanced. Heider [31] justifies this fact with the needthat people have to maintain balanced cognitive configurations. Furthermore, he developed a framework for studying thestructural arrangements between social actors and their attitudes, which is referred to in literature as the Balance Theory[32].The Balance Theory is centred on the concept of a POX triple where P is a person, O another social actor and X anobject, which may be a third person, an idea, a rock group, or anything else that P and O both acknowledge. This triplerepresents a cognitive configuration built by P , which relates P ’s beliefs in O ’s attitude towards X and P ’s own attitudetowards X and O . Fig. 2 represents an example of such a configuration where each line represents one of the attractionattitudes involved: P towards X , P towards O and O towards X .Those attitudes can be either positive (e.g., P likes O , O has a favourable attitude towards X , and so on) or negative( P dislikes O , P disapproves of O , and so on). Moreover, having three different elements with two value relations betweenthem makes it possible to build eight different configurations, which represent the eight cognitive states of the POX triple86R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103Fig. 2. An example of a POX cognitive configuration, according to Heider’s Balance Theory.Fig. 3. Stable POX cognitive configurations.Fig. 4. Unstable POX cognitive configurations.Fig. 5. Example of the POX configuration dynamics.studied in the Balance Theory. Heider suggested that some of these cognitive configurations are fraught with tensions thatmake them unstable, particularly if the attitudes are strong. He divided the eight configurations into two different sets: thestable configurations set, shown in Fig. 3, and the unstable configurations set, shown in Fig. 4.The Balance Theory hypothesis states that people avoid unstable cognitive configurations and that, if they realise theexistence of one, they mobilise their efforts to resolve it and change it to a stable state. For example, suppose that aperson P is initially positively attracted to an object X and another person O , and additionally believes that O is also ispositively attracted to X (this is the first case in Fig. 3). The cognitive state is balanced so P is fine with the situation. Butlater P discovers an unpleasant feature about X and develops a negative attitude towards it. The cognitive state becomesunbalanced (second case in Fig. 4), which creates a certain strain and tension on P . Thus, P will try to recover the balance.According to Heider’s model, P has two options: (1) change her/his attitude towards O and develop a dislike for O (fourthcase in Fig. 3), or (2) reconsider her/his attitude towards X and recover the initial attitude of liking X (first case in Fig. 3).In addition, there is a third option in which P tries to influence O to change her/his attitude towards X (second case inFig. 3). However, this situation is more uncommon because it involves additional effort, and, in certain circumstances, itmay be totally impossible. See Fig. 5 for a graphical representation of the example described above.Moreover, interpersonal attraction is often related to group cohesion [42] defined by Pepitone and Kleiner [58] as “thenumber and strength of mutual positive attitudes among the members of a group”. Thus, the higher and the more frequent thepositive interpersonal attraction relations in the group are, the higher the group’s cohesion level. This means that the group’smembers interact more often [5,41] and are more satisfied with the group’s interactions [26,43].R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–10387Fig. 6. The SGD model in the mind of each member of the group.Fig. 7. The agent’s mind’s components and the SGD model.4. SGD model: A model for group believabilityThe model proposed, the SGD Model (Synthetic Group Dynamics Model), was built on the principle that each memberof the group must be aware of the other members and the group itself. In addition, s/he should be able to build properknowledge regarding the group’s social structure and to use this knowledge to drive her/his behaviour.The group is modelled as a system composed of several autonomous agents that engage in interaction processes. Theseinteractions create the dynamics of the system. They affect the group’s state and, are simultaneously influenced by thatstate. In other words, the preconditions for the occurrence of an interaction depends on the state of the group and whenthe interaction occurs, it will change the state of the group (e.g., the social structure of the group may change).In concrete terms, the SGD Model was created as a module that influences the usual processes of a cognitive agent. Thus,the model influences the perception, knowledge building, behaviour and action processes of each agent (see Figs. 6 and 7).4.1. Target groupsThere are several definitions and types of groups. For that reason, we would like to clarify which kinds of groups theproposed model applies to before going into detail in its description.As discussed before, our study is focused on groups that involve a human user with several autonomous syntheticcharacters. These groups perform in a virtual environment and their members are committed to solving collaborative tasks.Thus, the group interactions must evolve in a way that will make the resolution of those tasks possible.In addition, the model applies to small groups, with only a few members, and without a strong organisational structure.We are not concerned with groups as crowds or complex organisations and societies of agents.The members of the group are implemented as autonomous software agents that can engage in conversation and canmanipulate objects in the virtual environment (e.g., get, give, use and drop items). The user is represented as an agent(avatar) in the system that is not autonomous but fully controlled by the user.The autonomous agents are assumed to be socially autonomous as discussed by Castelfranchi [16] in the sense that theyhave autonomy in their goals and beliefs. Nevertheless, this autonomy is only partial since the agents’ performances areinfluenced by the other agents in the group, including the user. Note that the performance can be influenced but nevercontrolled. The agent will always make a decision based on its own goals and beliefs.88R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–1034.2. The agents’ architectureThe SGD Model is characterised by four different levels:1. the individual level that defines the individual characteristics of each group member, such as personality;2. the group level that defines the group and its underlying structure;3. the interactions level that defines the different classes of interactions and their dynamics;4. the context level that defines the environment and the tasks that the agents can perform.These four levels represent the knowledge that the agents should build in order to implement the SGD Model in theirbehaviour. Furthermore, in addition to this knowledge, the agents’ behaviours in the group relies on three processes (seeFig. 7):1. Classification of the interactions (Identify Category): the agent is aware of the actions in the group and classifies theminto categories of interaction with specific semantics. For example, in this process the agent interprets if certain actionsare helpful for the group or not. This process uses knowledge from all four levels, that define the possible categories ofinteraction (especially from the interaction level), and from the context level that defines how the actions of the groupshould be interpreted (for example, by means of social norms).2. Propagation of the interaction consequences in the knowledge base (Interaction Effects): then, based on the identifiedcategory, the interaction produces changes on the knowledge, in particular in the individual and the group levels. Forexample, the interaction may change the social relations established between the members that it engages (e.g., thatinteract with each other).3. Influence on the agent’s actions decision (Action Influence): finally, the agent’s perception of the group and its mem-bers influences the actions that it performs in the group. For example, if the agent is not motivated, it will not try tosolve the group’s tasks.4.3. The individual levelThe individual level defines the knowledge that the agent builds concerning the individual characteristics of each memberof the group. This knowledge defines each member’s ability and personality:1. The agent’s abilities: define the actions that each agent can perform in the environment associated with their levels ofexpertise (e.g., how well the agent performs each of these actions). The set of abilities is important in determining theagent’s level of expertise, which helps define the agent’s position in the group.2. The agent’s personality: we define the agent’s personality using two of the dimensions proposed in the Five FactorModel [48]: Extraversion and Agreeableness. We only consider these two dimensions because they are associated withthe ideas of dominant initiative and socio-emotional orientation proposed by Bales [1]. The other dimensions are morerelated to task resolution, outside our main focus.2.1. Extraversion: is related to the dominant initiative of the agent. Thus, it will influence the agent’s frequency ofinteraction.2.2. Agreeableness: is related to the socio-emotional orientation of the agent. It defines the type of socio-emotionalinteractions that the agent will favour. More agreeable agents will favour positive socio-emotional interactions,while less agreeable agents will favour negative socio-emotional interactions.Each individual is represented, in a logical knowledge base, as a predicate that defines its identity as shown in Eq. (4.1).Agent(agentName)(4.1)Additionally, the agent is characterised by a set of functions, related to its personality and skills. Eqs. (4.2) and (4.3)respectively represent the dimensions of Extraversion and Agreeableness. And, for each skill, a function that represents theskill’s level of expertise is defined, as shown in Eq. (4.4).Extraversion(agentName)Agreeableness(agentName)Skill(agentName, skillName)4.4. The group level(4.2)(4.3)(4.4)The group level defines the knowledge that the agents build concerning the group and its underlying structure and,additionally, the agents’ attitudes towards the group.First of all, the group is defined as a set of individuals that follows the definition presented in the previous section.Moreover, group is a unique and identifiable entity with an inherent structure.R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103891. The group identity: identification is an important factor in the definition of a group. For that reason, the group needs aunique name to allow it to be clearly distinguishable in the environment and to enable the agents to recognise it andrefer to it.2. The composition: the composition is the set of individuals that are associated with the group. The composition maychange over time as new members may be admitted or old members excluded.3. The structure: the group’s structure is defined in different dimensions. According to Jesuíno [34] the most common onesare the structure of communication, the structure of power and the structure of interpersonal attraction (sociometricstructure [52]). Because we deal only with small groups, the structure of communication is simple since all charactersmay communicate directly with each other. Thus, we excluded this structure from our model. The group’s structure isthen defined in two dimensions: the structure of power that emerges from the members’ social influence relations, andthe structure of interpersonal attraction that emerges from the members’ social attraction relations.In the knowledge base, the group is represented as a predicate that follows Definition 4.5, where identity defines thesymbolic name of the group, and members defines a set with the names of the agents that belong to the group.Group(identity, members)(4.5)Furthermore, since the group’s structure emerges from the social relations established between its members, the groupcharacterisation also depends on the definition of these social relations, which can be of two different types:1. Social attraction: these relations define the interpersonal attraction of the members in terms of like (positive attrac-tion) and dislike (negative attraction) attitudes. These relations are unidirectional and not necessarily reciprocal (e.g., ifagent A is positively attracted to agent B, this does not necessarily mean that agent B is positively attracted to agentA).2. Social influence: relations of influence define relations of power. They quantify the capacity of one agent to influencethe behaviour of another. The influence is defined as the difference between the power which one individual can exerton another and the power with which the other is able to resist [24].These social relations are defined, in the agent’s knowledge base, as functions that follow the two Definitions 4.6 and 4.7.SocialInfluence(source, target, S)SocialAttraction(source, target, S)(4.6)(4.7)Social relations are directed from one agent, the source, to another, the target, and are assessed by a value which can bepositive, zero (neutral relation) or negative. Because social relations will change throughout the process of the group, thevalues determined by these functions will differ according to the situation S.Furthermore, the social relations of a member in conjunction with its level of expertise determine its position in thegroup. This position reflects the member’s relative significance in the group, which defines how important its contributionsare and how well they are accepted by the group. For example, actions performed by members that have more socialinfluence on the members of the group have stronger effects on the group’s process. Thus, the position in the group definesthe agent’s relative power in the group, which directly depends on (1) the overall social influence that the agent may exerton the others, (2) the attraction that the others feel for the agent and (3) the agent’s relative expertise in the group. Theposition in the group may be computed using the formula (4.8), where SkillLevel( A, G) denotes the relative skill level of theagent in the group and is computed by the formula (4.9).∀G, A: Group(G, members) ∧ A ∈ members,m(cid:2)Position( A, G, S) = SkillLevel( A, G) +m∈membersSocialAttraction(m, A, S) +m(cid:2)m∈membersSocialInfluence( A, m, S)(4.8)∀G, A: Group(G, members) ∧ A ∈ members,SkillLevel( A, G) =(cid:3)(cid:3)s Skill( A, s)mm∈members SkillLevel(m, G)(4.9)In addition to the relations that agents build with each other, they also build a relation with the group itself. This relationcaptures the member’s attitude towards the group and reflects the agent’s motivation in the resolution of the group’s taskand its engagement in the group’s interactions. The agent’s motivation is defined by a function as shown in Eq. (4.10). Thisfunction determines different values according to the situation S.Motivation( A, G, S)(4.10)Note that agents may belong to several groups at the same time, and, therefore, may have different values for theirmotivation and position in the group for each one.90R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–1034.5. The interactions levelThe interactions level describes the knowledge that the agent builds concerning the group’s interactions and their dy-namics. These dynamics reflect on (1) the changes that the group’s interactions induce in the agent’s perception of thegroup and, therefore, in the knowledge it builds about the group, and (2) in the rules that drive the behaviour of the agentin the group.The central notion in the interactions level is the concept of interaction. An interaction occurs when agents executeactions that can be perceived and evaluated by others. In fact, it may consist of several actions that are performed in acertain pattern. These actions can be performed simultaneously, which means that more than one agent may be involved inthe same interaction. In addition, other agents may support the interaction but not be directly involved in its execution. Forexample, agents may agree with a certain interaction and explicitly show their support for its execution without performinga single action concerning the interaction other than the declaration of support.Moreover, each interaction has a certain strength in the group that defines its relative importance in the group’s process.Additionally, each interaction may affect only certain members of the group. For example, when a member of the groupencourages another to perform a task, the effects of the encouragement will only be directly reflected on the agent that wasencouraged. However, it may indirectly affect other members that observe the interaction (see Eqs. (4.32), (4.33), (4.34) and(4.35) in Section 4.5.2).To summarise, an interaction is defined by:1. an action or pattern of actions that identify the type of interaction;2. the set of performers, which defines the agents that are engaged in the execution of the interaction;3. the set of supporters, which defines the agents that support the interaction without being directly involved in its execu-tion;4. the set of targets, which defines the agents that are affected by the interaction;5. and its strength in the group, which determines the relative importance of the interaction in the group.Furthermore, we have defined a predicate (4.11) to identify an interaction and a set of functions ((4.12), (4.13) and (4.14))to represent the interaction’s performers, supporters and targets.Interaction(I)Performers(I)Supporters(I)Targets(I)(4.11)(4.12)(4.13)(4.14)The strength of an interaction in the group is directly related to the position of the interaction’s performers and supportersin the group. It can be computed using the formula shown in (4.15).∀G, I: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I),Strength(I, G, S) =p(cid:2)Position(p, G, S) +s(cid:2)p∈Performers(I)s∈Supporters(I)Position(s, G, S)2(4.15)4.5.1. The classification of the interactionsIn order to model the dynamics of the group’s process, we have divided the several possible group interactions intodifferent categories. This categorisation is then embedded in the a priori knowledge of the agent. It will support the agent’sprocess of perception and identification of the interactions when it asserts new interaction facts in its knowledge base.Furthermore, although the interaction is closely related to the actions that the agents perform, its classification is morethan just the categorisation of the actions themselves. Classification also depends on the actions’ results, on the context ofthe execution, and also on the agents’ perception of the group. For example, the same action can be perceived as a positiveinteraction for the group by an agent but as a negative interaction by another.The classification that the SGD Model presents was based on the categories that Bales proposed on his IPA system [6].Thus, it similarly distinguishes between socio-emotional and instrumental interactions, and divides interactions as positiveor negative (see Fig. 8).On the socio-emotional level we use six categories which are similar to those presented by Bales. We consider threepositive socio-emotional interactions (agree, encourage and encourage group) and three negative social emotional interactionsthat are opposed through symmetry (disagree, discourage and discourage group).• Positive socio-emotional interactions1. Agree: This class of interactions show the support and agreement of an agent towards one of the interactions ofanother agent, consequently raising the importance of that interaction in the group.R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–10391Fig. 8. The categories of the interactions.2. Encourage: These interactions represent an agent’s efforts to encourage another agent, consequently facilitating itssocial condition (e.g., increasing its motivation).3. Encourage Group: This class of interactions is similar to the Encourage category but apply to the group itself. Theseinteractions encourage the group and facilitate the group’s social condition (e.g., everyone’s motivation).• Negative socio-emotional interactions1. Disagree: This class of interactions show the disagreement of an agent towards one of the interactions of anotheragent, consequently decreasing the importance of that interaction in the group.2. Discourage: These interactions represent an agent’s hostility towards another agent and its efforts to discourage it.3. Discourage Group: This class of interactions are similar to those in the Discourage category but apply to the groupitself.The categories proposed by Bales at the instrumental level mainly focus on speech acts. In addition, there is no clearconnection between the instrumental interactions and the task itself. However, in the context of virtual environments,the interactions not based on speech acts are very important because agents may manipulate the objects defined in theenvironment. Also, the design of the interactions’ influence on a problem-solving group and its members is easier if theinteractions’ definition is based on the concept of “problem”. Therefore, following these two principles, we defined fourinstrumental interactions: two positive ones (facilitate problem, gain competence) and two negative ones (obstruct problem,lose competence), that do not have a direct analog in the IPA instrumental categories.• Positive instrumental interactions1. Facilitate Problem: This class of interactions represents the interactions of an agent that solves one of the group’sproblems or facilitates its resolution.2. Gain Competence: These interactions make an agent more capable of solving a problem. This includes, for example,the learning of new capabilities or the acquisition of information and resources.• Negative instrumental interactions1. Obstruct Problem: This class of interactions represents the interactions of an agent that complicates one of thegroup’s problems or makes its resolution impossible.2. Lose Competence: These interactions make an agent less capable of solving a problem, for example, by forgettinginformation or losing control of resources.Furthermore, to handle the interactions’ categorisation, we have defined a set of auxiliary predicates that identify aninteraction as instrumental (4.16), socio-emotional (4.17), positive (4.18) or negative (4.19). In addition, we have defined onepredicate for each category of interaction that identifies the interaction as a member of that category. For example, there isa predicate Encourage(I) that identifies the interaction I as an Encourage interaction.Instrumental(I)SocioEmotional(I)Positive(I)Negative(I)(4.16)(4.17)(4.18)(4.19)4.5.2. The dynamics of the interactionsAs previously stated, the interactions create the dynamics in the group. Such dynamics are supported by the classificationpresented in Section 4.5.1 and are modelled by a set of rules consistent with French and Raven’s theory of social power [24]and Heider’s balance theory [32]. On one hand, these rules define how the agent’s and the group’s state influence the92R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103occurrence of each kind of interaction and, on the other hand, how the occurrence of each type of interaction influencesthe agent’s and the group’s state.First of all, the execution of interactions by a member in the group depends on her/his individual characterisation aswell as her/his perception of the group’s state. Thus, s/he will interact in a completely different way according to differentgroup situations, for example, in groups with different elements or with different emergent structures.In general, the frequency of the interactions depends on the agent’s motivation, group position and personality [1,50,68]. Thus, highly motivated agents, as well as agents with high extraversion or agents with a good position in the group,engage in more interactions. In turn, agents that are not motivated, with a low position in the group, or with low levelsof extraversion will engage in few interactions or not interact at all. These elements of the model are captured by the rulesynthesised in the following equation2 (4.20):∀G, I, A: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ A ∈ members,(cid:5)(cid:4)Poss( A, I, G, S) ⇒ HighExtraversion( A)(cid:5)(cid:4)∨ HighPosition( A, G, S)(cid:5)(cid:4)∨ HighMotivation( A, G, S)(4.20)To better define this rule we have introduced a predicate Poss( A, I, G, S) that represents the possibility of an agent Ato perform an interaction I in a group G in a situation S. Equations that use the Poss predicate follow the structure ofprecondition axioms3 defined by Funge [25]. In addition, we have introduced a predicate High( X) that determines if X is arelative high value.Furthermore, the agents’ personalities also define some of their tendencies for the social emotional interactions [1].Agents with high levels of agreeableness will engage more frequently in positive socio-emotional interactions while agentswith low agreeableness will favour the negative socio-emotional interactions. This leads us to the rules expressed in thefollowing equations ((4.21) and (4.22)):∀G, I, A: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ A ∈ members,(cid:5)(cid:4)Poss( A, I, G, S) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Positive(I) ⇒ HighAgreeableness( A)∀G, I, A: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ A ∈ members,Poss( A, I, G, S) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Negative(I) ⇒ Low(cid:5)(cid:4)Agreeableness( A)(4.21)(4.22)Corresponding to the High( X) predicate, the Low( X) predicate, introduced in Eq. (4.22), determines if X is a relative lowvalue.Furthermore, the level of expertise of a member in a group determines the frequency of her/his instrumental interactions.Thus, more skillful agents will engage in more instrumental interactions than non-skillful agents [50]. This fact is expressedin the following Eq. (4.23):∀G, I, A: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ A ∈ members,(cid:5)(cid:4)Poss( A, I, G, S) ∧ Instrumental(I) ⇒ HighSkilLevel( A, G)(4.23)Additionally, the agents with a higher position in the group are usually the targets of more positive socio-emotionalinteractions while the agents with a lower position are the targets of more negative socio-emotional interactions [50].4 Inaddition, when an agent is considering whether to engage in a socio-emotional interaction, its social relations with the targetare very important. Members with higher social influence on the agent and/or members to which the agent is positivelysocially attracted will often be the targets of positive socio-emotional interactions, otherwise they will often be targets ofnegative socio-emotional interactions. The next two rules express these tendencies:∀G, I, A, B: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B} ⊂ members,Poss( A, I, G, S) ∧ B ⊂ Targets(I) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Positive(I) ⇒(cid:5)(cid:4)High(Position(B, G, S)) ∨ HighSocialAttraction( A, B, S)(cid:5)(cid:4)∨ HighSocialInfluence(B, A, S)∀G, I, A, B: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B} ⊂ members,Poss( A, I, G, S) ∧ B ⊂ Targets(I) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Negative(I) ⇒(cid:5)(cid:4)Position(B, G, S)Low∨ Low(cid:5)(cid:4)SocialAttraction( A, B, S)(cid:5)(cid:4)∨ LowSocialInfluence(B, A, S)(4.24)(4.25)2 Equations presented often make a reference to high level categories of interaction. For example, Positive Instrumental instead of Gain Competence andFacilitate Problem. When this happens the equation matches all sub-categories, thus, the dynamics are similar for all. In this case, the sub-categoriesrepresent different ways to achieve the same effects. For example, if (1) an agent improves its skills (Gain Competence) or (2) solves part of the task(Facilitate Problem), it will gain some influence in the group.3 A precondition axiom is an equation in the form of A ⇒ B where B represents the preconditions for A to be true. In other words, for A to be true,then B must be true.4 Note that an agent has a high position in the group if it has high influence over the others and/or if the others are highly socially attracted to it.R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–10393The previous rules define the conditions for the occurrence of an interaction in the group. But, in addition, when agentsget the perception of the execution of an interaction, they react to it according to the classification that they internally giveto the interaction. These reactions are translated into changes in the perceived state of the group.In general, instrumental interactions are related to changes in the structure of social influence. For instance, positiveinstrumental interactions increase their performers’ social influence on the members of the group, through expert andinformation power [24], as well as the performers’ own motivation. Any member that demonstrates expertise and solvesone of the group’s problems or obtains resources that are useful to its resolution, will gain influence over the others. Inturn, members that obstruct the problem or lose competence will lose influence on the group and become less motivated.5These rules are summarised in Eqs. (4.26) and (4.27).∀G, I, A, B: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B} ⊂ members,Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ Instrumental(I) ∧ Positive(I) ⇒SocialInfluence( A, B, Sn) < SocialInfluence( A, B, Sn+1) ∧Motivation( A, G, Sn) < Motivation( A, G, Sn+1)∀G, I, A, B: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B} ⊂ members,Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ Instrumental(I) ∧ Negative(I) ⇒SocialInfluence( A, B, Sn) > SocialInfluence( A, B, Sn+1) ∧Motivation( A, G, Sn) > Motivation( A, G, Sn+1)(4.26)(4.27)In the definition of these rules, a new predicate Performs( A, I, G, S) was introduced to represent the performance of aninteraction I by an agent A in a group G in a situation S.Furthermore, in turn, socio-emotional interactions are associated with changes in the structure of social attraction. Anagent changes its attraction for another agent positively if it is the target of positive socio-emotional interactions by thatagent and, negatively, otherwise. Interactions of the category Encourage have the additional effect of increasing the target’smotivation in the group. The following equations (4.28), (4.29), (4.30) and (4.31) present these rules:∀G, I, A, B: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B} ⊂ members,Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Positive(I) ⇒SocialAttraction(B, A, Sn) < SocialAttraction(B, A, Sn+1)∀G, I, A, B: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B} ⊂ members,Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Negative(I) ⇒SocialAttraction(B, A, Sn) > SocialAttraction(B, A, Sn+1)∀G, I, A, B: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B} ⊂ members,Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ Encourage(I) ⇒Motivation(B, G, Sn) < Motivation(B, G, Sn+1)∀G, I, A, B: Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B} ⊂ members,Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ Discourage(I) ⇒Motivation(B, G, Sn) > Motivation(B, G, Sn+1)(4.28)(4.29)(4.30)(4.31)Agents also react to socio-emotional interactions when they are not explicitly the targets of the interaction. FollowingHeider’s balance theory [32], if an agent observes a positive socio-emotional interaction towards an agent that it feels posi-tively attracted to, then its attraction for the performer of the interaction will increase. Similar reactions occur in the case ofnegative socio-emotional interactions. If, in the latter example, the agent performed a negative socio-emotional interaction,then the observer’s attraction for the performer would decrease. These rules are shown in the following equations (4.32),(4.33), (4.34) and (4.35):5 It can be argued that certain people with certain personality traits become more motivated when they fail to achieve a task. However, this is not themost common behaviour and, therefore, we did not model it.94R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103∀G, I, A, B, C : Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B, C} ⊂ members,(cid:5)(cid:4)Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Positive(I) ∧ HighSocialAttraction(C, B, Sn)⇒SocialAttraction(C, A, Sn) < SocialAttraction(C, A, Sn+1)∀G, I, A, B, C : Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B, C} ⊂ members,(cid:5)(cid:4)Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Negative(I) ∧ HighSocialAttraction(C, B, Sn)⇒SocialAttraction(C, A, Sn) > SocialAttraction(C, A, Sn+1)∀G, I, A, B, C : Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B, C} ⊂ members,(cid:5)(cid:4)Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Positive(I) ∧ LowSocialAttraction(C, B, Sn)⇒SocialAttraction(C, A, Sn) > SocialAttraction(C, A, Sn+1)∀G, I, A, B, C : Group(G, members) ∧ Interaction(I) ∧ { A, B, C} ⊂ members,Performs( A, I, G, Sn) ∧ B ∈ Targets(I) ∧ SocioEmotional(I) ∧ Negative(I) ∧ Low(cid:5)(cid:4)SocialAttraction(C, B, Sn)⇒SocialAttraction(C, A, Sn) < SocialAttraction(C, A, Sn+1)(4.32)(4.33)(4.34)(4.35)The intensity of the interactions’ effects, described in the previous rules, directly depend on the strength of the interac-tion in the group. For example, Encourage interactions performed by members with a better position in the group will havea higher impact on the target’s motivation.4.6. Behaviour generationThe agents’ behaviour is generated by the base algorithm shown in Fig. 9. This algorithm relies on 5 main functions:NProactiveIdleCycles returns the number of “mind” update cycles that agents wait until they execute their proactive be-haviours. This function supports the ideas behind the agents’ frequency of interaction in the group expressed byEq. (4.20). It uses a combination of the agent’s current position in the group, its extraversion, its motivation and asmall random factor to produce the result. The higher the agent’s position in the group, its extraversion and themotivation, the lower the result will be (e.g., smaller waiting intervals).UpdateState processes incoming perceptions and updates the agents’ internal state. This includes the categorisation ofevents into the interactions’ categories, described in Section 4.5.1, and changes in the group model expressedby Eqs. (4.26)–(4.35). The most important update is on the interpersonal relations among the members of thegroup and consequent position of each member in the group—computed by Eq. (4.8). Fig. 10 shows the pseudo-code for an implementation of the UpdateState function in the case of the occurrence of and Encourage interaction,corresponding to the implementation of the rules expressed by Eqs. (4.28), (4.30) and (4.32).ReactiveBehaviour generates a reactive reply to the group’s events. These behaviours enable agents to react to the occurrenceof interactions categorised in the UpdateState function. For example, agents can encourage members that failedthe execution of an important action for the task (Obstruct Problem category) or politely reply to agents that justencourage them. The reactive rules follow Eqs. (4.21), (4.22), (4.24) and (4.25). Fig. 11 shows the pseudo-code for animplementation of the ReactiveBehaviour function in the case of the occurrence of an ObstructProblem interaction,corresponding to the implementation of the rules expressed by Eqs. (4.21), (4.22), (4.24) and (4.25).MotivatedToActis complement to NProactiveIdleCycles to implement the ideas of the frequency of the interaction of membersin the group. It uses the same arguments (position in the group, extraversion, motivation and a small randomfactor) to decide if the agents have the chance to perform their reactive behaviours. This function is importantto make the reactive behaviours follow the same rules as proactive behaviours, regarding the frequency of theFig. 9. Base algorithm for the generation of the agents’ behaviour.R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–10395Fig. 10. Base algorithm for the function UpdateState in the case of the occurrence of an Encourage interaction. This captures the situation where agentA encourages agent B and a third agent Self observes the interaction, where all three of them are members of group G. The changes are made in theperspective of Self. IncrFunction is a function that increases the value of the first argument by an amount weighted by the latter arguments. For example, inthe second line, the increase of agent B’s attraction for agent A depends on the strength of the interaction in the group (e.g., the position of agent A andother agents that supported the interaction in the group). The UpdateGroupPositions function computes the new values for the positions in the group giventhe changes just made to the interpersonal relations.Fig. 11. Base algorithm for the function ReactiveBehaviour in the case of the occurrence of an ObstructProblem interaction. This captures the situation whereagent A makes the group’s task harder to achieve (e.g., by failing the execution of a particular action) and this is observed by agent Self, both members ofgroup G. The decision to reply to this event is based on a probability p computed by the GenerateProbability function that returns a value in the interval[0, 1]. This value increases as the value of any of the arguments increases (e.g., the probability is higher if A has a high position in the group). Valuep corresponds to the probability of having a positive reply to the event, thus, encouraging the one(s) responsible for it, while 1 − p corresponds to theprobability of having a negative reply. Random is a function that generates random values in the interval [0, 1].interaction. For example, despite being highly agreeable, an agent should not encourage other members if it isextremely shy and has a low position in the group.ProactiveBehaviour starts the proactive decision process. This process includes the planning of the agents’ next actions. Theplanning algorithm is centred on the group’s task keeping in mind the contributions of the other members of thegroup. Thus, the algorithm does not necessarily outputs a task action for the agent. It may generate a task actionfor another member of the group. For example, the agent may feel that others have higher chances of performingthe task successfully. In such cases, the agent will deliberately encourage the other member to act. This behaviourfollows Eq. (4.23).5. Case study: Perfect circle, a collaborative gameTo assess the effects of the SGD Model we developed a collaborative game called “Perfect Circle: the Quest for theRainbow Pearl”.6 The game places four autonomous characters and one user-controlled character in a virtual environmentand defines a context of interaction and a task for the group.The group’s goal is to search the world for a magic item. To achieve this, the group must travel around the world throughmagic portals that are activated by the powers of gemstones. Their task is to gather and manipulate the gemstones in orderto get the required ones that will open the portal (see Fig. 12). To achieve this, characters need to apply their individualabilities in order to change the gems’ forms, sizes and colours. For example, if the group has two small rubies but it needsone medium-sized ruby, one character can use its ability to merge the small stones into a bigger one. In addition, two ormore characters can combine their efforts if they all have the same ability. As a result, the probability of success of theaction becomes higher.The game’s task was carefully designed having in mind that the group’s task has a very important role in the group’sprocess and is particularly important for groups used in research studies, because the choice of the task may influence the6 This game can be downloaded from http://gaips.inesc-id.pt/~rprada/perfect-circle/.96R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103Fig. 12. The group is trying to activate one of the portals in order to advance in the game.results [51]. For example, certain types of tasks are more suitable to be solved by groups (e.g., conjunctive and associativetasks) and, therefore, encourage group interactions while others do not.Following the suggestions of Mennecke and Wheeler [51] we designed a task such that:1. it is appropriate for all the subjects, since, all the necessary knowledge to execute the task is within the game and all theelements of the group have access to it;2. it promotes subjects’ intellectual engagement by presenting a background story and rewarding the group with points afterthe correct execution of each puzzle;3. it has a good level of complexity. The task is not trivial and requires a certain engagement of the user to be perfectlyunderstood. However, the task does not require any special skills other than a good understanding of the abilities of thecharacters. In addition, the difficulty increases as the group gains experience in the resolution of tasks (e.g., the puzzlesget more difficult);4. it is conjunctive, because characters have to choose their abilities from many different ones, no single character canperform the task alone. In addition, several characters will solve the task faster than a single character and time is animportant factor for the reward;5. finally the differences in the subjects’ experiences are controlled because the environment is shared between all the mem-bers and the available interactions are similar for all of them.Furthermore, the game makes every character in the group engaged in solving the same task. However, there are manyways to reach a solution, and if each of the characters follows its own way,7 the group may never solve the task. Hence,characters have to coordinate their actions in order to follow a similar strategy in the search for the correct gems to activatethe portal.For this reason, every action that is performed in the group, concerning the resolution of the task, is discussed by thegroup beforehand. The discussion protocol has three different steps:1. First, one character declares that s/he wants to take a certain action (e.g., “I think that it will be best if I merge these twosapphires”).2. The other characters can respond to the proposal with one of the following: (1) Agree with the course of action; (2) Jointhe action and help in the execution; (3) Disagree with the course of action.3. Then, based on the opinions expressed by the group, the character decides to proceed with the execution of the actionor to withdraw the proposal. If s/he decides to proceed with the action then s/he starts its execution. All of the othercharacters that have decided to join the action start their contributions to the joint execution.In addition, the group’s interactions are not restricted to the execution of the task. Each member (user and autonomous)can, at any time, engage in socio-emotional interactions by encouraging or discouraging the other members of the group.7 All characters use the same planning algorithm, but the solutions depend on individual skills and heuristics. For example, heuristics may take intoaccount the agents’ interpersonal relations when considering introducing others’ actions in the plan.R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103975.1. The SGD model in the gameFig. 13. Character Daotru encourages Oehaohom.To implement the SGD Model in the Perfect Circle game it was necessary to define the knowledge regarding contextthat establishes the relation between actions and events in the game and the categories of interactions of the model (seeSection 4.2). These relations influence, on one hand, how particular actions are perceived by agents as group interactions(see Section 4.5) and, on the other hand, how intentions to perform group interactions are generated and transformed toparticular actions in the game. In this case, agents are able to use 2 instrumental interactions (Facilitate Problem, ObstructProblem) and 4 socio-emotional interactions (Agree, Disagree, Encourage and Discourage).The rest of the model is independent of the context, so no additional work was needed.5.1.1. From game actions to group interactionsThe Facilitate Problem interaction corresponds to the event of a successful execution of a manipulation on a gemstone(e.g., merge, split, etc.) and the Obstruct Problem corresponds to a failure. This means that every time an agent or group ofagents, including the user, execute an action on a gem all agents will interpret that as an instrumental interaction, which ispositive (Facilitate Problem) if the execution was successful8 and negative (Facilitate Problem) otherwise.Socio-emotional interactions have direct correspondence to actions in the game. This means that there is a specific actionin the game to agree, disagree, encourage and discourage. This makes the identification of socio-emotional interactionstrivial. For example, every time an encouragement action is performed in the game all agents perceive it as an Encouragegroup interaction.The join action described in the previous section corresponds to an Agree interaction but, additionally, binds the agentto perform an action on a gem if the proposal is accepted.We chose to have this direct correspondence between game actions and group interactions to simplify the process ofperception and identification of the group interactions. We believe that this process is not trivial in more complex scenarios(e.g., if the interactions are based on speech). It can be an interesting research problem by itself. Our intention was tominimise that effort on our work.5.1.2. From group interactions to game actionsThe agents decision process (see Section 4.6) generates requests of interaction that need to be translated into specificactions in the game.In the case of the socio-emotional interactions, this process is trivial. As seen before, each socio-emotional interaction inthe SGD Model has a corresponding action in the game. For example, if the agent decides to start an Encourage interaction,this corresponds to performing an encouragement action in the game.Encouragement actions take the form of positive sentences (see Fig. 13), such as: “I believe you.” or “Keep the goodwork.” In turn, discouragement actions are negative sentences, such as: “Stop doing that!” or “I don’t care, just shut up.”These sentences are predefined and are chosen automatically by the game according to the situation, for example, if theencouragement is a reply to another encouragement. Therefore, agents (and the user) can only state their intentions toencourage/discourage a character, the actual sentence used is beyond their control.8 The success of the execution of an action in the game follows a probabilistic function that depends on the skill level of the performer of that particularaction.98R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103Facilitate Problem corresponds to raising the discussion of a proposal for action. The action is only started if the proponentfeels supported by the group (e.g., if members with better position in the group agree with the action). In Perfect Circle,agents do not deliberatively mess up the group’s task, thus, Obstruct Problem interactions are not pro-actively generated.The decision process is also influenced by the context, in particular, it needs a model of the task to properly execute theplanning algorithm and to support the decision to Agree or Disagree. In this case, agents’ decide to Agree or Disagree witha proposal based on their planning algorithm. The nodes explored during planning are kept in the agents’ memory. If theproposal matches one of the actions on these nodes the agent is inclined to Agree; otherwise, it is inclined to Disagree. Notethat, since Agree and Disagree are socio-emotional interactions, this decision is not based only on the task model but alsofollows the socio-emotional rules described in Section 4.5.2.6. StudyIn order to evaluate the effects of the SGD Model on the interaction experience of a user, we performed an experimentusing the Perfect Circle game. This experiment was conducted at our university with 24 students of computer science, 20of them being male and 4 being female. The subjects’ ages ranged between 19 and 31 years old.6.1. Independent variablesThe experiment was conducted with two main independent variables: the use of the SGD Model to convey the believablegroup dynamics and the initial structure of the group:1. Use of the SGD Model: two different versions of the game were built: one where the characters followed the SGD Modeland one where they did not. When the characters did not use the model, they were unable to engage in socio-emotionalinteractions, with the exception of Agree and Disagree with a proposal (without any socio-emotional connotation). Inaddition, their frequency of interaction was always constant and the decision to proceed with a proposed action wasnot weighted by the members’ position in the group (as in the SGD Model). Rather, it was simply according to themajority. Note that in both cases the characters’ planning algorithm is able to solve the task.2. The Group Initial Structure: subjects can start the game in a group with non-neutral initial social relations, whichmeans that the initial group can have levels of cohesion that may be either very high or very low. Two differentscenarios were considered: one where the group had neutral social relations and a second one where the members ofthe group disliked each other, which took the group cohesion to very low levels. Note that this condition could only beapplied when the game was run with the believable group dynamics model.6.2. Dependent variablesTo assess the quality of the subjects’ interaction experience while playing the Perfect Circle game, we measured theirsatisfaction with the game as well as their trust and social identification with the group, since, according to Allen et al.[2], these two variables are related to the satisfaction of people when interacting in a group. Thus, our three dependentvariables are:1. Group Trust: people’s trust in a group has a positive effect on their perceptions about their experiences in the group[22], which consequently leads to more satisfactory interaction [3].2. Group Identification: according to Ashforth and Mael [4], social identification is, in addition to social trust, one of thefactors that allow the members of a group to be more engaged and more satisfied with the group.3. Satisfaction with the Game: by definition, computer games are supposed to be fun, thus, the user should enjoy everymoment that s/he spends with the game. Hence, improving the interaction experience, as stated in the initial hypothesis,would also imply increasing the user’s fun.6.3. MeasuresTo measure the variables discussed in the previous section, we have referred, whenever possible, to questionnaires foundin the literature and previously applied in other studies. In the case of group trust, we relied on the questionnaires thatAllen et al. [2] used in their studies. They proposed a seven items’ questionnaire with five positive items and two negativeones. To keep the questionnaire consistent and, therefore, easier to understand by the user we have decided to balance thepositive and negative items. For this reason, we have only used six items and changed one of the positive sentences for anegative one. The items of the resultant questionnaire are presented in Table 2.Since we changed the initial questionnaire we computed the Cronbach’s Alpha for the new items to check the question-naire’s reliability. The result was 0.787, which tell us that the questionnaire is acceptable.99 We did not have access to the original questionnaire’s Cronbach’s Alpha for comparison, but usually a value above 0,7 is considerable acceptable.R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–10399Table 2The items of the group trust questionnaireThe Group Trust Questionnaire1. Most people on this team are honest and can be trusted.2. Team members are always interested only in their own welfare.3. Members in this team are always trustworthy.4. One has to be alert or someone is likely to take advantage of you.5. If I have a problem there is always someone to help me.6. Nobody in the group is willing to help me with my tasks.Table 3The items of the social identification questionnaireThe Social Identification Questionnaire1. I feel strong ties with the members of this group.2. I did not enjoy playing with this group.3. I feel accepted as a member of this group.4. I experience a sense of not belonging to this group.5. If I play again I would like to play with the same group.6. I am not sufficiently acknowledged in this group for my expertise.Table 4The items of the game satisfaction questionnaireThe Game Satisfaction Questionnaire1. I loved to play this game.2. I felt bored while playing the game.3. The game was very interesting.4. I would not suggest this game to anybody.5. I would like to play this game again.6. The game was too complex.In the case of social identification with the group, we once again relied on the work of Allen et al. [2], since they alsoproposed a questionnaire to measure this variable. Their questionnaire is composed of five different elements, all with apositive nature. These items formed the basis of our questionnaire; however, we made some significant changes (again forconsistency): (1) some of the sentences were changed to meet our gaming scenario, (2) three of the items were changed tonegative, and (3) a new positive item was added to complete the set of six. The resulting questionnaire is shown in Table 3.The Cronbach’s Alpha for these items was 0.797.We have found several questionnaires in the literature to measure the users’ satisfaction with computer systems, suchas the End User Computing Satisfaction questionnaire [20]. However, these questionnaires focus on questions related tothe system’s accuracy, ease of use and effectiveness, and do not take into account the user’s joy during the experience. Infact, as stated by Wiberg [76], these classical measures are not completely appropriate for attaining the users’ satisfactionin entertainment systems. For example, if the user spends a lot of time on a particular task this is not necessarily a badsign, since this may happen because the user is having fun with the task. For these reasons, we have developed our ownquestionnaire that is shown in Table 4. It was based on the idea that, if a user’s interaction experience is fun, then s/hewould like it, repeat it and suggest the experience to others. The Cronbach’s Alpha for these items was 0.739.All questionnaires asked the subjects to rate each of the items in a scale of 1 (Totally Disagree) to 7 (Totally Agree).6.4. ProcedureEach subject participated in a trial of two hours. In the first half-hour, subjects read the game’s instructions and questionswere answered about the game’s mechanics. Then, they created their own character and played the game for one hour. Afterthat, subjects filled out a questionnaire, which included several items related to the three dependent variables (group trust,the group identification and satisfaction with the game).The game was installed according to three different conditions (8 subjects per condition):(C1) In the first condition, the game was installed without the SGD Model.(C2) In the second condition, the game was installed with the SGD Model and the group had neutral social relations in thebeginning of the game.100R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103Table 5Results from the Kruskal–Wallis test comparing the sample across the experimental conditions(N = 24)Chi-SquaredfAsymp. Sig.Age2.5842.275Gender2.575.750Gaming experience.1472.929Table 6Results from the Kruskal–Wallis test comparing all the experimental conditions (N = 24).Chi-SquaredfAsymp. Sig.Trust6.4922.039IdentificationSatisfaction5.9602.0514.5032.105Table 7Results from the Mann–Whitney test comparing conditions 1 and 2 (N = 16)Mann–Whitney UAsymp. Sig. (2-tailed)Trust13.000.045IdentificationSatisfaction16.000.09020.500.226(C3) In the third condition, the game was installed with the SGD Model but the members of the group started with negativesocial attraction relations, thus, the level of cohesion of the group was very low.10Furthermore, apart from the differences mentioned, all the other details were similar in the three conditions. The fourautonomous characters had the same name, the same appearance, the same personality and the same skills. In addition,the sequence of the game puzzles was predefined and the same for all the subjects. This sequence was randomly generatedbeforehand. The subjects were selected on the fly at the beginning of each session and they freely chose which computerto use (they were unaware of the different conditions).In all of the conditions, players were focused on the game for the whole hour and never showed signs of boredom. Thegame was complex enough to keep the subjects motivated, but not too complex to make them frustrated. Furthermore,during the trial, subjects never interacted with each other.6.5. ResultsBefore analysing the dependent variables we checked the sample in order to identify possible significant differencesacross the experiment’s conditions. This verification was made in three different items: age, gender and gaming experience.These items were part of the questionnaire presented to the subjects. Gaming experience was accessed by questions askingif the subjects liked to play computer games and if they played computer games often.11 Results showed that there were nosignificant differences in the three groups of subjects regarding age, gender and gaming experience (see Table 5).Comparing the different experimental conditions in relation to the dependent variables reveals statistically significantdifferences in Trust (see Table 6). Furthermore, the difference between the conditions in relation to Social Identificationapproaches statistical significance.The previous result, however, does not show if all the conditions differ or if the difference comes from the comparison ofa particular pair of conditions. In order to check out possible differences between pairs of experimental conditions, a seriesof Mann–Whitney tests were run.Table 7 gives the results of the Mann–Whitney test comparing condition 1 and 2. It shows that subjects’ trust in thegroup was significantly higher when the autonomous characters’ behaviour followed the SGD Model (Mean Rank for condi-tion 1 = 6.13; Mean Rank for condition 2 = 10.88).The comparison of conditions 1 and 3 can be seen in Table 8. The results show that subjects’ trust in the group issignificantly higher when the autonomous characters follow the SGD Model even if the cohesion of the group is initiallyvery low (Mean Rank for condition 1 = 5.69; Mean Rank for condition 3 = 11.31). Furthermore, subjects identify themselvesbetter with the group if the SGD Model is used and the initial cohesion of the group is low (Mean Rank for condition 1 = 6;10 We include this condition to check if the initial structure of the group influences the users’ experience, but not to carefully explore how this influenceworks. For this reason, we did not include all possible combinations of social relations (e.g., having a very high social cohesion group). For this, a new anddifferent study should be performed.11 Actual sentences used were: “I love to play computer games.” and “I play computer games frequently.” Subjects were asked to rank each sentencefrom 1 (Totally Disagree) to 7 (Totally Agree).R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103101Table 8Results from the Mann–Whitney test comparing conditions 1 and 3 (N = 16)Mann–Whitney UAsymp. Sig. (2-tailed)Trust9.500.018IdentificationSatisfaction12.000.03524.000.397Table 9Results from the Mann–Whitney test comparing condition 2 and 3 (N = 16)Mann–Whitney UAsymp. Sig. (2-tailed)Trust29.500.792IdentificationSatisfaction19.500.18712.000.035Mean Rank for condition 3 = 11). Note that this difference was not significant when the initial cohesion of the group wasneutral (see Table 7).In relation to the comparison of conditions 2 and 3, Table 9 shows significant differences for Satisfaction. Participantswere more satisfied with the game when the initial cohesion of the group was low (Mean Rank for condition 2 = 6; MeanRank for condition 3 = 11).The above results suggest that, by using the SGD Model to drive the behaviour of the autonomous members of the group,the levels of Trust (when comparing condition 1 with 2 and 3) and Social Identification (when comparing condition 1 with3) of users were higher. However, the same cannot be said regarding their levels of Satisfaction. There are differences inthe Satisfaction of users when the initial group’s cohesion changes (comparing condition 2 with 3). It seems that the mostcohesive group induced lower levels of satisfaction in the subjects. We believe that this effect may be related to the factthat the socio-emotional interactions in the most cohesive group are essentially positive, which is probably less believablethan a scenario where negative socio-emotional interactions occur more often, as is the case in condition 3. Furthermore,subjects might not find the group to be challenging. Because everyone agrees with each other, group interactions are moreboring. However, with this study we cannot confirm these hypotheses.Note that, if Bonferroni’s correction is used when comparing the three conditions with each other, the threshold forthe acceptance of a significant result drops to 0.017 (instead of the usual 0.05). Thus, the results described become lesssignificant. However, this is due to the fact that we did not have many subjects in our experiment (only 8 per condition).Nevertheless, we believe that the results presented are still interesting, although we should conduct a new study with moresubjects to substantiate them.7. Conclusions and future workIn this paper, we describe a model to improve the believability of groups of autonomous synthetic characters in order topromote user collaboration with such groups. This model was successfully used in the context of a collaborative game. Theexperiment conducted in this scenario demonstrated the positive effect that the model can have on the users’ interactionexperience. Specifically, the experiments showed that user trust and identification with the synthetic group increased.These positive results support our argument that to ensure that users have a good interaction experience in groupscenarios, it is not enough to have members perform optimally in the group, and, furthermore, members should behaveaccording to the group’s context, or, in concrete terms, within the structure of interpersonal relationships. The first pointis supported by the fact that, in all three conditions of the study, agents used the same planning algorithm that was ableto reach an optimal solution for the game’s task. The second point is supported by the fact that when the SGD Model wasused, users’ interaction experience was better.Something that we still want to explore is the impact of each individual component of the model. For example, itcould be interesting to understand if the relations of social influence have less/more impact on the interaction experiencethan the relations of interpersonal attraction, or to understand the impact of having different frequencies of interaction orindividual personality. From our observations, different players seek different experiences. For instance, some players gavemuch importance to the socio-emotional relations and acted as socio-emotional leaders encouraging others to perform,while other players tried to perform most work for themselves. For this reason, we believe that different model componentsmay appeal differently to different people. Nevertheless, results from this study can help us to identify less importantcomponents of the model and, eventually, to simplify it.On the other hand, we foresee some possible extensions to the model, because there are aspects of the group dynamicsthat could be further explored. For example, we have not addressed the dynamics of the group regarding its composition.We did not explore the rules for the acceptance of new members into the group or the rules to support the decision of amember to leave the group. This, among other things, is related to the individual expectations concerning the group (e.g.,the goal that led the individual to join the group), which is not considered in our model, and should, therefore, be addressedin the future.In addition, the structure of the group could be more complex and include, for example, specific organizational roles.102R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103Another possible extension is related to the personality of the members. We could include factors such as the level ofindividualism of each member that could assess the level of commitment of the members to the goals of the group incontrast to their own individual goals. In fact, in our example, the autonomous members of the group were always focusedon the resolution of the task and were always performing in the group’s best interest. However, in real life, this is often notthe case, and we have some evidence, from our experiment, that groups with a certain amount of conflict were preferredby the users. Therefore, we believe that the study of the balance between the cohesion of the group and the amount ofconflict that stimulates the user can be an interesting theme for future research.Furthermore, inter-group relations were not explored by our model. The model was centred on the interaction of thegroup members with each other without taking into account their interaction with external groups. This would be a veryinteresting extension and would be essential for scenarios where several different groups engage in collaboration and com-petition.Moreover, we believe that the SGD Model can be used in different applications apart from the entertainment scenariosthat we explored. For example, it could be used in systems for training leadership, to support the collaboration of humansin computer-mediated scenarios, or in a tool for sociologists to perform their studies of group dynamics.References[1] S. Acton, Great ideas in personality—theory and research (online), http://www.personalityresearch.org/bigfive.html, last access on Jan 2005.[2] K. Allen, R. Bergin, K. Pickar, Exploring trust, group satisfaction, and performance in geographically dispersed and co-located university technologycommercialisation teams, in: Proceedings of the NCIIA 8th Annual Meeting: Education that Works, March 18–20, 2004.[3] J. Ang, P.H. Soh, User information satisfaction, job satisfaction and computer background: An exploratory study, Information and Management 32 (1997)255–266.[4] B.E. Ashforth, F.A. Mael, Social identity and the organization, Academy of Management Review 14 (1989) 2–39.[5] K.W. Back, Influence through social communication, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 46 (1951) 9–23.[6] R.F. Bales, Interaction Process Analysis, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1950.[7] J. Bates, Virtual reality, art and entertainment, Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments (1992).[8] J. Bates, The role of emotions in believable characters, Communications of the ACM 37 (7) (1994) 122–125.[9] T. Bickmore, J. Cassell, Relational agents: a model and implementation of building user trust, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors inComputing Systems—CHI’2001, ACM Press, Seattle, USA, 2001.[10] Bioware, Star wars: knights of the old republic (online), http://www.lucasarts.com/products/swkotor/, 2003.[11] B. Blumberg, (void*): A cast of characters, in: Visual Proceedings of the Conference on SIGGRAPH 99, ACM Press, 1999, p. 169.[12] K.M. Carley, Z. Lin, Organizational designs suited to high performance under stress, IEEE—Systems Man and Cybernetics 25 (1) (1995) 221–230.[13] K.M. Carley, Z. Lin, A theoretical study of organizational performance under information distortion, Management Science 43 (7) (1997) 976–997.[14] D. Cartwright, A. Zander, Group Dynamics: Research and Theory, Harper and Row, New York, 1968.[15] J. Cassell, J. Sullivan, S. Prevost, E. Churchill, Embodied Conversational Agents, MIT Press, 2000.[16] C. Castelfranchi, Guaranties for autonomy in cognitive agent architectures, in: Intelligent Agents—ECAI-94 Workshop on Agent Theories, Architectures,and Languages, The Netherlands, Springer Verlag, 1994, pp. 56–70.[17] C. Castelfranchi, Modelling social action for AI agents, Artificial Intelligence 103 (1–2) (1998) 157–182.[18] P.R. Cohen, H.J. Levesque, Teamwork, Noûs. Special Issue on Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence 25 (4) (1991) 487–512.[19] B.E. Collins, B.H. Raven, Group structure: Attraction, coalitions, communication, and power, in: The Handbook of Social Psychology, vol. 4, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2000.[20] W.J. Doll, G. Torkzadeh, The measurement of end user computing satisfaction, MIS Quarterly 12 (2) (1988) 259–274.[21] P. Doreian, R. Kapuscinski, D. Krackhardt, J. Szczypula, A brief history of balance through time, Journal of Mathematical Sociology 21 (1996) 113–131.[22] J.W. Driscoll, Trust and participation in organizational decision making as predictors of satisfaction, Academy of Management Journal 21 (1978) 44–56.[23] R. Evans, T.B. Lamb, Social activities: Implementing Wittgenstein, Gamasutra (2002).[24] J.R.P. French, B.H. Raven, Bases of social power, in: Group Dynamics: Research and Theory, Harper and Row, New York, 1968.[25] J.D. Funge, Making them behave: Cognitive models for computer animation, PhD thesis, University of Toronto, 1998.[26] E. Gross, Primary functions of the small group, American Journal of Sociology 60 (1954) 24–30.[27] B.J. Grosz, C.L. Sidner, Plans for discourse, in: Intentions in Communication, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990, pp. 417–425.[28] Guye-Vuilleme, Simulation of nonverbal social interaction and small groups dynamics in virtual environments, Technical report, PhD thesis, ÉcolePolytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 2004.[29] J.R. Hackman, C.G. Morris, Group process and group effectiveness: A reappraisal, in: Group Processes, Academic Press, New York, 1978.[30] A. Hare, Handbook of Small Group Research, Free Press, New York, 1976.[31] F. Heider, Attitudes and cognitive organization, Journal of Psychology 21 (1946) 107–112.[32] F. Heider, The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations, Wiley, New York, 1958.[33] J.I. Hurwitz, R.F. Zander, B. Hymovitch, Some effects of power on the relations among group members, in: Group Dynamics: Research and Theory,Harper and Row, New York, 1968.[34] J.C. Jesuíno, Estrutura e processos de grupo: interacções e factores de eficácia, in: Psicologia Social, Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian, 2000.[35] D. Kipnis, Does power corrupt? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 24 (1972) 33–41.[36] D. Kipnis, P.J. Castell, M. Gergens, D. Mauch, Metamorphic effects of power, Journal of Applied Psychology 61 (1976) 127–135.[37] K. Lewin, Field theory and experiment in social psychology: Concepts and methods, American Journal of Sociology 44 (1939) 868–897.[38] K. Lewin, D. Cartwright, Field Theory in Social Science, Harper and Row, New York, 1951.[39] C.A. Lindley, The gameplay gestalt, narrative, and interactive storytelling, in: Proceedings of Computer Games and Digital Cultures Conference, 2002,pp. 203–215.[40] R. Lippitt, N. Polansky, F. Redl, S. Rosen, The dynamics of power, Human Relations 5 (1952) 37–64.[41] A.J. Lott, B.E. Lott, Group cohesiveness, communication level and conformity, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 64 (1961) 408–412.[42] A.J. Lott, B.E. Lott, Group cohesiveness as interpersonal attraction: A review of relationships with antecedent and consequent variables, PsychologicalBulletin 64 (1965) 259–303.[43] D.G. Marquis, H. Guetzkow, R.W. Heyns, A social psychological study of the decision-making conference, in: Groups, Leadership and Men, CognitivePress, Pittsburgh, 1951.R. Prada, A. Paiva / Artificial Intelligence 173 (2009) 80–103103[44] S.C. Marsella, D.V. Pynadath, S.J. Read, Psychsim: Agent-based modeling of social interaction and influence, in: Proceedings of the International Confer-ence on Cognitive Modeling—ICCM 2004, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, 2004.[45] C. Martinho, A. Paiva, Pathematic agents, in: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents, Seattle, USA, ACM Press, 1999.[46] M.J. Mataric, Designing and understanding adaptive group behavior, Adaptive Behavior 4 (1) (1995) 51–80.[47] M. Mateas, A. Stern, A behavior language for story-based believable agents, Intelligent Systems 17 (4) (2002) 29–47.[48] R. McCrae, P. Costa, Toward a new generation of personality theories: Theoretical contexts for the five factor model, in: The Five Factor Model ofPersonality: Theoretical Perspectives, Guilford, New York, 1996, pp. 51–87.[49] J.E. McGrath, Social Psychology: A Brief Introduction, Holt, New York, 1964.[50] J.E. McGrath, Groups: Interaction and Performance, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1984.[51] B.E. Mennecke, B.C. Wheeler, An essay and resource guide for dyadic and group task selection and usage. ISWorld Net Research Tasks (online), http://kelley.iu.edu/bwheeler/ISWorld/index.cfm, 2004.[52] J.L. Moreno, Who Shall Survive? Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Co., Washington DC, 1934.[53] S.R. Musse, D. Thalmann, Hierarchical model for real time simulation of virtual human crowds, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and ComputerGraphics 7 (2) (2001) 152–164.[54] New-Line-Productions, The lord of the rings movies official site (online), http://www.lordoftherings.net, 2001.[55] T.M. Newcomb, The Acquaintance Process, Holt, Rinchart and Winston, New York, 1961.[56] Obsidian-Entertainment, Neverwinter nights 2 (online), http://www.atari.com/nwn2, 2006.[57] S. Pasquariello, C. Pelachaud, Greta: A simple facial animation engine, in: Sixth Online World Conference on Soft Computing in Industrial Applications,2001.[58] A. Pepitone, R. Kleiner, The effects of threat and frustration on group cohesiveness, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 54 (1957) 192–199.[59] R. Prada, I. Machado, A. Paiva, Teatrix: Virtual environment for story creation, in: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on IntelligentTutoring Systems, Montreal, Canada, Springer, 2000.[60] D.V. Pynadath, S.C. Marsella, Psychsim: Modeling theory of mind with decision-theoretic agents, in: Proceedings of the International Joint Conferenceon Artificial Intelligence, Edinburgh, Scotland, 2005, pp. 1181–1186.[61] B.H. Raven, Social influence and power, in: Current Studies in Social Psychology, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1965.[62] W.S. Reilly, J. Bates, Natural negotiation for believable agents, Technical report, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 1995.[63] C.W. Reynolds, Flocks, herds, and schools: a distributed behavioural model, in: Computer Graphics (SIGGRAPH ’87 Conference Proceedings), 1987,pp. 25–34.[64] J. Reynolds, Tactical team AI using a command hierarchy, in: AI Game Programming Wisdom, Charles River Media, 2002, pp. 260–271.[65] J. Rickel, W.L. Johnson, Virtual humans for team training in virtual reality, in: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on AI in Education,1999, pp. 578–585.[66] J. Schell, Understanding entertainment: Story and gameplay are one, Computers in Entertainment 3 (1) (2005).[67] M. Schmitt, T. Rist, Avatar arena: Virtual group-dynamics in multi-character negotiation scenarios, in: 4th International Workshop on Intelligent VirtualAgents, 2003, p. 358.[68] M.E. Shaw, Group Dynamics: The Psychology of Small Group Behaviour, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1981.[69] H.A. Simon, A behavioral model of rational choice, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 69 (1) (1955) 99–118.[70] M. Tambe, Towards flexible teamwork, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 7 (1997) 83–124.[71] B. Tomlinson, B. Blumberg, Social synthetic characters, Computer Graphics 26 (2) (May 2002).[72] Troika, The temple of elemental evil (online), http://www.atari.com/toee/, 2003.[73] Valve, Half-life (online), Valve games official website, http://www.valvesoftware.com/games.html, 1998.[74] W. van der Sterren, Squad tactics: Team AI and emergent maneuvers, in: AI Game Programming Wisdom, Charles River Media, 2002, pp. 233–246.[75] W. van der Sterren, Squad tactics: Planned maneuvers, in: AI Game Programming Wisdom, Charles River Media, 2002, pp. 247–259.[76] C. Wiberg, From ease of use to fun of use: Usability evaluation guidelines for testing entertainment web sites, in: Proceedings of Conference onAffective Human Factors Design, Singapore, 2001.[77] J. Yen, J. Yin, T.R. Ioerger, M.S. Miller, D. Xu, R.A. Volz, Cast: Collaborative agents for simulating teamwork, in: Proceedings of the Seventeenth Interna-tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2001.