ELSEVIER Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) l-27 Artificial Intelligence The topology of boundaries Margaret M. Fleck* Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa Ci& IA 5.2242, fJ,YA Received November 1990; revised May 1993 Abstract High-level representations used in reasoning distinguish a special set of boundary locations, at which function values can change abruptly and across which adjacent regions may not be connected. Standard models of space and time, based on segmenting R”, do not allow these possibilities because they have the wrong topological structure at boundaries. This mismatch has made it difficult to develop formal mathematical models for high-level reasoning algorithms. This paper shows how to modify an W” model so as to have an appropriate topological structure. It then illustrates how the new models support standard reasoning algorithms, provide simple models for previously difficult situations, and suggest interesting new analyses based on change or non-change in scene topology. 1. Introduction (including is the real line Most work in artificial language) of events intelligence robotics, and natural in space or arrangements not only “core” AI, but also peripheral involves about arrange- reasoning in time. The most popular model (R) and the most popular model for space is real Euclidean structure at object, event, topological regions need functions can display abrupt in value across region boundaries. Standard models of regions based on R” do areas such as vision, ments of objects for time space R”. However, or region boundaries. not be connected changes not allow either of these possibilities. In the symbolic models used in reasoning, to one another and otherwise continuous these models have the wrong adjacent Practical implementations in artificial intelligence can problem. An algorithm may not make extensive or sophisticated * E-mail: rnfleck@cs.uiowa.edu. 0004-3702/96/$15.00 @ 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved SSDIOOO4-3702(94)00051-4 typically work around this use of topological 2 MM. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 concepts. Or the author may adopt an model which works in his particular application but may not work for other applications, there are only two types of regions intelligence topological mismatch between R” and what is desired for artificial pattern of difficulties when researchers come to build theoretical, mathematical of their algorithms. Thus, researchers waste time battling with inappropriate models, e.g. a robot motion planner may assume in the scene, obstacles and free space. However, time that could be better spent designing practical algorithms. that the creates a analyses theoretical some authors [2,3,19,20,22,23,36] axioms without a specific concrete model. This is mathematically their analyses on a set of risky. It is (at least) one concrete it is to extend an axiom set without a clear picture of the object that these to prove an axiom set consistent It is difficult impossible from axiom sets (cf. [ 521). And to derive possible models except by exhibiting base Alternatively, symbolic difficult model. almost axioms are intended to describe. In this paper, I will show how to modify an Rn model so it has the correct topology. subtle, I will procede straight into a review of basic structure topological and why the structure of IF in Section 4 and discuss from As the issues involved are relatively definitions topology from should be assigned within is not correct alternative models the literature, (Section 2). I will regions and across boundaries, in Section 5. Section 6 works through some extended examples to show how they would be handled then discuss what in the new model. the new model I will describe (Section 3). 2. What is topology? A satisfactory model of space and the topological ture, because practical reasoning: time must define a suitable topological structure determines two concepts of great importance struc- in are continuous, l which functions l which regions and paths are connected. the definitions I will review for additional details. In this section, topology text (e.g. [ 38,391) and of basic topological concepts. t See any 2.1. Open sets and connectivity Readers will be familiar with terms such as “connected function” from courses in calculus or analysis. Topology generalizes “continuous definitions In particular, closely ordering familiar examples, so that they can be applied to a wider range of models tied to a metric readers unfamiliar with topology may believe (e.g. the usual distance (e.g. the usual linear order on points for points function in time). Although it is not true in general. “open region”, set” and these for space and time. that topological notions are in space) and/or an this is true for some ’ I will resist the temptation groups, Euler characteristics, to describe the fascinating and knot polynomials, range of derived because topological they would distract concepts from such as the main homology point of this paper. MM. Fleck/Artijicial Intelligence 80 (1996) l-27 3 Two pieces of information are required to specify a particular topological space: l what points does the space contain, and l what sets of points are “open”. So, for ex,ample, in the usual topology on the real line R, the open sets are the familiar open intervals, e.g. ( 1,2), (202, co), and unions of such intervals. The real line can also be given other topologies, see [38]. Open sets can also be specified indirectly, e.g. via order relations, by cell complex constructions [ 391, or by taking a subset of isome established space such as JR”. In particular, ( -57,3), Definition 1. Let A be a subset of a topological space B. In the subspace topology on A, a subset S of A is open if and only if S = X n A, where X is some open subset of B. So, the subset A = [ 0, 1 > U ( 1,5] of lR is typically given the subset topology. The open sets of A are the intersections of A with open sets of R. To be a well-formed topological structure, the open sets must satisfy the following conditions: l the null set and the entire space are both open, l the union of any (finite or infinite) collection of open sets is open, and l the intersection of any finite collection of open sets is open. A set is said to be closed, in some specified topology, if its set complement is open. It is possible for a set to be both open and closed (e.g. the whole of R) or neither (e.g. a half-open interval of W, in the usual topology). The closure ;ii of a set A is the smallest closed set containing A. A regia’n in a topological space is said to be connected if it is not the union of two disjoint open sets. A region A is said to be path-connected if any two points n and y in A can be connected by a continuous path lying entirely in A. Formally, there must be a contmuous function p : [ 0, 1 ] -+ A, such that p(O) = x and p( 1) = y. Informal models of space do not distinguish these two notions. Fortunately, this does not matter: connectedness and path-connectedness will be equivalent for the spaces discussed in this paper. 2.2. Continuous functions The topological definition of continuity is a generalization of the familiar E-S defini- tion from calculus: Definition 2. A function f : X --) Y is continuous if and only if f-’ (U) is open for any open set U C_ Y. In order to apply this definition, we must specify a topology for both the domain and range of the function. Within a connected region, continuous functions behave as you expect them to. If, however, the domain consists of two non-connected components (e.g. the domain is [ 0,l) U ( 1,5] ), the value of a continuous function can jump abruptly as one passes between the two components. 4 M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 Continuous functions are also used to match representations topologically, from another via stretching, bending, e.g. de- and termine whether one object can be obtained deformation. Formally, we define: Definition 3. A function f : X + Y is a homeomolphism has a continuous homeomorphism inverse. X and Y are said from X onto Y. and to be homeomorphic if there exists a if f is continuous To match two complex situations, as in stereo matching (cf. [ 141)) a stronger con- straint can be useful [ 28,45,46] : Definition 4. Two subsets X and Y of R” are isotopic if there is a continuous homeomorphisms fi : X -+ IP, i E [O,l], such that fo(X) =X and fl(X) = Y. family of Two homeomorphic spaces have identical are, in addition, deformed into the other.2 embedded “the same way” topological properties. Two isotopic spaces in W”, so that one can be continuously 3. The desired topological structure Reasoning algorithms, both high-level a particular for locating boundaries and low-level, distinguish algorithms formal definition images, and events, processes, or states locations as “boundaries”. Boundaries demarcate objects in 3D space, distinctive in 2D camera Although accepted searchers as to where boundaries artificial applications space or time. However, as we shall see in this section, from interior of regions contrast, R” has the same structure at all locations. set of regions of time. in 1D representations are still flawed and there is no generally re- situations. Many for structure in the required across boundaries. By should be placed depend on having a suitable in most practical to differ greatly of a boundary, is considerable that required the structure intelligence topological consensus among seems there 3.1. Boundaries the topological and the objects, Before discussing regions, or intervals facts, we must first draw a clear distinction between boundaries two parts of the same object can fail to be locally connected. The object might consist of more than one region may double back so as to connected to your finger, they do touch itself, as illustrated not typically the boundaries of 3D objects and 2D regions need not form closed curves, as illustrated in Fig. 1. When you touch your thumb component. Or, alternatively, fuse on contact. Similarly, they delimit. First, a connected in Fig. 2. Second, distinguish two distinct a finger from the hand connected regions can be connected to one another. For example, people to it, despite the lack of any clear boundary 2 I am abusing notation slightly to make the presentation accessible to readers unfamiliar with topology. Strictly speaking, an isotopy relates two embeddings of a space X into another space such as IW. MM. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 Fig. 1. Examples of a region touching itself, with an intervening boundary: a finger and thumb, a split ring. Fig. 2. The boundary between two adjacent fingers ends abruptly, both in 3D and in its 2D projection. Fig. 3. A region need not be completely delimited by boundaries: (left) a finger and a thumb are parts of a connected hand, (right) a region of complex shape may be subdivided for the convenience of internal algorithms. separating them (Fig. 3). Similarly, a description such as Sentence 1 need not refer to the maximal connected interval over which its predicate (“John is in town”) holds, i.e. the verb may refer to an interval which does not extend all the way to the boundaries at which the state starts and ends. Finally, reasoning algorithm may subdivide a connected region for convenience of processing. For example, a 2D region may be represented by a set of cells in a digitized map. Or, a surface of complex topology may be decomposed into subsets of simple topology, e.g. a body and “handles” [45]. For all these rea- sons, it is necessary to regard boundaries and regions as distinct concepts, only loosely related. M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 Fig. 4. Properties change abruptly at object boundaries. So, here we see a transition between a cup (spotted, white, ceramic) and a table (stripy, brown, wood). such as texture, color, and material composition vary continuously within objects, but can Sentence 1. John was in town from 2:00 to 3:O0. 3.2. Behavior of functions Many reasoning algorithms assume that, during the course of any specified process or over time. Sharp changes are allowed only across a event, properties change continuously states, limited set of event boundaries. For example, Sentence 2 describes two separated by an abrupt change. Sentences 3-4 describe continuous such as texture, color, and material composition vary smoothly within regions but change abruptly across region boundaries in 2D images or 3D scenes, properties abrupt changes between processes. Similarly, two constant (Fig. 4). Sentence 2. Boris and Martina were married yesterday. Sentence 3. At the boundary of the prism, to (x’, y’) due to refraction. the light ray’s direction changed from (x, y) Sentence 4. The temperature of the water rose to 100 degrees, and then it started boil. to that image values is used throughout and abrupt change This contrast between continuous [ 16,171, motion vectors, or stereo disparities in property values, e.g. due to dark cracks or phase discontinuities in- artificial texture distri- telligence. Computer vision algorithms assume butions [ 14,431 vary continuously within regions. 3 These algorithms hypothesize boundaries where values change abruptly. Sharp in texture spikes (Fig. 5)) can also indicate boundaries and regions, typically more compact to later vision algorithms Qualitative to summarize use continuity within regions into succinct of boundaries [42] ). are then passed such as shape analysis and object identification. behavior over extended [ 19,31,33,34,54,56] [ 161. Descriptions intervals of time representations the original algorithms reasoning [ 7,351, image than (cf. 3 In fact, these algorithms make the stronger assumption that values have bounded derivatives within regions. M.M. Fleck/Art$cial Intelligence 80 (1996) l-27 I m Fig. 5. A boundary can separate two regions with identical properties: (left) a dark crack, (right) a phase change. They then identify a sparse set of locations at which (processes). changes abruptly. At such a location, to determine which process will occur over the next interval of time. In general, some across the boundary and some change abruptly. For quantities may change continuously but its example, when a ball hits a wall, the position of the ball changes continuously velocity changes abruptly. the reasoner must do a more detailed examination the qualitative state the models used It can be argued that many “abrupt” changes are gradual [ 561. This may be appropriate for some applications. However, resolution that it holds for all reasonable models of low-level physics. Further, and more tantly, allowing abrupt changes often results in plannitrg and linguistic events should be modelled as abrupt changes particularly Sentence 2: there is no such state as “half-way married”. are abstractions in simpler models. There is a strong community that certain (e.g. are in in state. Gradual change explanations involving human-defined if examined at high enough it is not clear impor- reality and from actual physical abstract properties: [ 2,10,21,30,58] ) who believe for examples in reasoning unconvincing semantics 3.3. Connectivity important requires a representation in reasoning about physical systems. First, for the material connectivity Region is also systems connectivity connectivity analysis o:f mechanical of objects. Material collectively into one “object”. one collective position, orientation, connectivity ethernet cable, eventually Material1 connectivity, transmission In standard implies is an abstraction about the behavior of many small patches of stuff by grouping that allows a reasoner and velocity. Even for non-rigid to reason them together freshman physics, each object moves as a rigid unit, with objects, material if we pull on one end of an taut or the other end will move. however, fails across boundaries. For example, a telephone may the table will not as a side-effect of of representation to it: if we pick up the phone, to see lack of connectivity either the cable will become of forces along the object: in material properties. This may be true in some low-level rest on a dlesk without being connected be pulled along with it. It may be tempting differences the molecular to allow two regions of identical properties (Fig. 6). structure. However, in high-level more abstract models, to come into contact without fusing it seems necessary together Many objects extracted by people for high-level reasoning or to be composed computer regions or connected vision of a small number of connected systems often compute shape properties only curves (e.g. [ 6]), because this seems seem either to be connected components. Because of this, image for connected the chance to increase M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 Fig. 6. Two metal blocks, with identical prope$ies, can come into contact without fusing together. that the whole region or boundary belongs to one real-world object. Similarly, most reasoning systems use only connected intervals to model events, processes, or states. Certain linguistic constraints on overlaps between actions can be modelled using a distinction between connected intervals and boundaries (Section 6.3). Short disruptions in an action (cf. [ 57]), or clutter obscuring a region in an image, do not necessarily force one to drop connectedness assumptions, because they might be eliminated by low-level processing. It is also necessary to represent the connectivity of empty space. Objects move [ 26,591 and fluids flow [ 19,23,31,33,34] only through connected regions of empty space and are halted by (insufficiently porous) objects. Some path planning algorithms [ 591 use concepts closely tied to connectivity, e.g. retractions and homotopies. Abstract flows such as heat, light, and electricity also flow through connected paths, where connectivity is defined by abstract barriers such as changes in conductivity, refractive index, density, or heat capacity. At these barriers, they may stop, lose amplitude, or change direction. Well-chosen barriers can allow reasoning to consider only a limited subsection of the world without excessive interference from outside forces [ 231. Connectivity information can also be used to compensate for errors in shape infor- mation. For example, suppose we want to represent a floppy sack. If we represent the possible locations of the interior and exterior surfaces of the sack, the variability in shape leaves open the possibility that the exterior surface lies inside the interior surface. To prevent this, the representation must contain explicit topological information, such as “the sack plus its mouth is bounded by two sphere-shaped boundaries, one inside the other, separating the sack’s inside from its outside”. This clarifies the relationship between the two sides of the sack and explains how the sack can contain objects. For similar reasons, topological information is sometimes used to augment algebraic repre- sentations of surfaces, because numerical problems in the algebraic models may cause apparent gaps between surfaces that should be connected. 3.4. What happens in IP’? Now, suppose that we try to build a formal model for a set of objects in space, or a set of events over time. The traditional approach is to use lRn as the model of space or time. Each object or event is modelled as a subset of IV. An expectation implicit in most traditional modelling is that the set of regions in an n-dimensional model must completely cover R”. In computer vision jargon, we are building a “segmentation” of the scene. In philosophy jargon, we are not allowing “truth gaps”. M.M. Fleck/Art@cial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 9 for assigning boundary points to two regions in W”. Points can go with lefthand left), go with righthand region (top right), belong jointly to both (bottom left), or be divided Fig. 7. Several possibilities region between them (bottom (top right). It should be clear from good model Because we have assumed no gap between adjacent edges of two adjacent regions (jointly) Furthermore, because in value between authors the different possibilities (e.g. for the interior of regions. At boundaries, the above discussion that Iw”, with its usual there that the regions cover all of space or time, however, regions. Fig. 7 shows some possible regions. No matter which of these models is a topology, is a problem. there can be shapes for the abutting the two is used, occupy a connected they are connected, continuous region of R”, so they are connected topologically. functions cannot have abrupt jumps the two regions. This problem has not been noted before: previous instead on the relative merits of [ 2,8,9,21,22,30,41] illustrated ) have concentrated in Fig. 7. 4. The new model segmentation of IR” into regions, and continuity, does not correctly motel the effect of boundaries on the underlying So, an exhaustive tions of connectedness boundaries. To model must “cut” do this is, to delete all points no longelr form part of any region and they are no longer any function.4 explain how it gives scenes together with the standard defini- topological properties at space, we the boundaries. The simplest way to from R” (Fig. 8). That is, these points domain or range of this new model and structure of W along in the boundaries The rest of this section will discuss the correct topological properties. in the the details of the topological continuous 4.1. The boundaries In order to create well-formed the set of boundaries. However, in some previous models. In particular, 4 It may be convenient to reference is legitimak so long as the overall these points implementation it is necesssary regions, to impose some constraints on these constraints do not need to be as strong as those I will require that in data structures used in computer emulates the behaviors described below. implementations. This 10 M.M. Fleck/Art$cial Intelligence 80 (1996) l-27 Fig. 8. A set of boundaries (left) and the region topology they induce (right). Constraint 1. The boundaries are a (topologically) closed set of points. Thus, if a line segment is in the boundaries, its vertices must also be in the boundaries; is in the boundaries, if a 2D region the regions to be a manifold of the same dimension a region cannot be only one point wide (infinitely at an isolated cutpoint. In most applications, it is probably best to require that its edges must also be in the boundaries. This forces as the original space. 5 In particular, thin), either for its entire extent or Constraint 2. The boundaries in any bounded subset of R” are isotopic to the union of a finite number of semi-algebraic sets. Most readers are probably familiar with semi-algebraic constraints of polynomial in robotic and visual modelling. The extension to semi-algebraic sets allows one to make boundaries (for precise definitions, sets: they are sets defined by see [59] ) and are to boundaries which (deriva- to (e.g. set or the Alexander Homed Sphere, cf. [46] ). theoretical is a technical topological condition spaces sharp corners. This smooth nasty the intersection used extensively are only isotopic tives of all orders exist) by rounding prevent one from constructing the boundaries letting Such situations proofs. be a Cantor cannot occur in real life and their existence may complicate a variety of exceedingly Boundaries are not, however, required the boundaries for representing of dimension n. For example, as well as ID curves and isolated points. Such thick boundaries vision with traditional for implementing restrictions would not significantly of boundaries [ 141 (see Section 6.5). Furthermore, the theoretical model. blurred representations transitions isotopies simplify on-cell to be thin, i.e. of dimension < (n- 1) in a scene in a 2D scene can contain some 2D regions in low-level for compatibility and complex intersections, are useful [ 151, and as a technical device such dimensionality This model extends easily In a 2D rectangular digitization, subset of the plane Boundaries images. is identified with a rectangular edge. share a common can then contain entire 2D cells, edges between cells, and/or vertices where representations, location (a cell). The cells for adjacent e.g. digitized camera each digitized to digitized locations 5 Any open subset of a manifold is a manifold. M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (19%) 1-27 11 El . Fig. 9. In a digitized model, the boundaries must be made up of cells, edges, and vertices from the digitization. However, the region topology (right) is derived exactly as in non-digitized models. four cells meet (Fig. 9). 6 This has been used in implementations of several computer vision algorithms [ 13-15171 and Section 6.5. 4.2. The topology The new models are given the subspace topology, as defined in Section 2.1. Thus, in the interior of regions, the new models look just like lP and formal definitions of continuity and connectedness work in the familiar way. However, two regions separated by a boundary are no longer connected to one another, because of the line of missing points between them. Because adjacent regions are not connected, the values of a continuous function can jump abruptly between the two regions. This is exactly the behavior specified in Section 3. In this model, the edges of regions look “open”. 7 That is, neighborhoods on the edges of a region are homeomorphic to lRn. Some authors [23] have the intuition that the edges of a region should, instead, look “closed”, i.e. be homeomorphic to a closed half-space of B”. Models similar to the new one, but with “closed” edges, can be built using a slightly more complicated mathematical construction [ 12,131. However, I have not been able to find any convincing practical or mathematical reason why a reasoning algorithm should need “closed” edges. Furthermore, the “closed” models do not allow two regions to touch (be infinitely close but not fused), whereas the “open” models support a three-way distinction between nearby regions, regions in contact, and fused regions (Sections 4.5 and 6.4). Since lthe model of a scene is always a subspace of R”, we can transform one model continuously into another model via isotopy (see Section 2.2). An isotopy can move a boundary continuously, shrink a region so as to widen the adjacent boundary, or expand a region so as to narrow the adjacent boundary. It cannot change the handedness of a region that differs topologically from its mirror image, nor can it remove a region from inside another, ring-shaped, region. In reasoning about motion and collision of objects in space (as in freshman physics), requiring an isotopy between models at successive times would concisely capture the fact that each object moves continuously, without 6 The extension to other dimensions and non-regular digitizations is beyond the scope of this paper. See [ 12-151. ’ The repj.ons arc both open and closed topologically, so I am not using this word in its technical sense. 12 M.M. Fleck/Art@cial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 breaking up, developing been used in stereo matching: see Section 6.5. cracks, or merging with other objects. This constraint has also 4.3. Functions In the new model, abrupt changes to the domain of the function. Since underlying in the value of a function for all cases in which functions in reasoning the following constraint on representations are represented boundaries by seem applications behave discontin- algo- used by reasoning adding a boundary to account uously, rithms: I propose Constraint 3. All functions are continuous. In practical discontinuous sentation. terms, behavior this means that if the reasoning from one of its functions, it is required algorithm observes apparently its repre- to restructure Restructuring may be accomplished in the domain of the function boundary change can be modelled as gradual, by changing or adding intermediate of the function may be obtained, abrupt change may be attributed the values of the function. Finally, not relevant to the task at hand and remove values to the function’s in which to account in several ways. The reasoner may hypothesize a for the function’s behavior. Or, the thresholds on what constitutes “abrupt” representation range. A higher-resolution the change may appear more gradual. The to sensor noise and removed by changing (smoothing) the reasoner may decide that this entire function is it from the model. The appropriate method of restructuring the simple event of turning on a light can reasonably be modelled as either an I believe in different contexts, and that a reasoner may need to depends on the application. For example, one. Unlike some previous researchers [56], apparently abrupt change or a continuous that both models are appropriate, maintain as a set of molecules or as a fluid following must be internally consistency consistent. We will see (Sections severely constrains what models can be constructed. (e.g. a gas may be modelled the ideal gas law). However, each model that internal 5.1, 6.1, and 6.3) several qualitatively distinct models of a situation 4.4. Region borders Many algorithms locations in computer vision track boundaries, so as to convert maps of into connected reasoning boundary algorithms often refer to the locations at which sharp changes occur. Since the boundary shifts to the borders of regions, points are deleted i.e. thin strips of region adjacent (Fig. 10). Specifically, we define curves for later shape analysis. Similarly, in the new models, attention naturally to the region boundaries Definition 5. An open set E of points isotopic to R. is a border of a set of regions R if R - E is M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 13 Fig. 10. Because boundaries (left) are deleted in the new models, attention shifts to region borders (right, diagonally shaded), thin strips of region adjacent to the boundaries. In other words, deleting the border points from the regions shrinks the regions slightly but does trot change their topological shape. Within the topological constraints, borders are free to come in a variety of widths. In fact, purely topological conditions can’t prevent a border from having strange protrusions that don’t reflect the boundary shape. However, the intent is that borders be made “narrow” and approximately “uniform” in width, using definitions of “narrow” and “uniform” that are appropriate to the individual application. Low-level sensory data, as in computer vision, is spatially sampled (digitized). For such data, it is convenient to use borders whose width is one sample location or one observation. In high-level representations, the borders might constitute “the smallest interval over which the change of state ha,s clearly taken place” [ 10, p. 1411. For many purposes, it is not necessary to specify the border width exactly. Traditional algorithms which refer to boundaries can typically be converted to use borders instead. In implementation, a section of border can be represented as a section of boundary plus an inward/outward distinction, or as a piece of region plus the di- rection in which the adjacent boundary lies. Tracking borders in 2D images is actually easier than tracking boundaries [ 151 (cf. also [40] ). A digitized border segment al- ways has a unique successor, whereas boundary tracking is poorly defined at junctions and when boundaries are thick. High-level vision algorithms, such as shape analysis and object identification, can accept borders in place of boundaries with only minor revisions. In some cases [ 181, they become simpler. The code used in our introductory vision laboratories is entirely border-based. Section 6 shows how some typical types of qualitative reasoning might be rewritten using borders. 4.5. Touching Many authors in AI and the allied fields [2,3,10,21-231 consider it important to allow two intervals in time or two patches of space to “touch” one another. In order for two sets of points to “touch”, three key properties must be satisfied: l the two sets do not overlap, l there is nothing between them, and l the distance between them is insignificant, preferably zero. 14 M.M. Fleck/Art@cial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 in Sentence 5, the second event occurs “right after” the first and in Sentence 3 So, (above), the state change occurs “in an instant”. Sentence 5. The robot moved forward two inches, then grabbed the block. regions it easier to model to touch makes Allowing For example, the tabletop. additional great impact on low-level to plan motions have fewer degrees of freedom if we put a cup on a table, gravity will maintain If we push something forces will be generated in space. from fixed table, e.g. a paint scraper, into contact. Such effects have a robot control algorithms, which can go unstable when asked algorithms, objects in contact towards a rigidly as the two come than objects surrounded by empty space. involving contact. For high-level planning the physics of objects it at zero distance The key observation, which seems not to have been made explicit by previous authors, require touching only at region or event boundaries. Some allow regions of space or intervals of time to example in the model. However, no one has produced a convincing is that the motivating examples existing axiom systems touch at any location of touching at a location in the middle of a homogeneous region or action. (such as [2,3]) (distance their metric The new models inherit from R”, just as they inherit are separated by a thin boundary, not overlap and there specifications nonzero distance apart. However, we can still identify adjacent structure regions they are zero distance apart. 8 As the regions do the above regions will be some the adjacent are used, adjacent function) structure. Thus, is nothing between If thick boundaries regions formally: their topological if two adjacent and differential regions meet for touching. them, Definition 6. Two regions A and B are adjacent such that all points on the line segment connecting boundary points) belong to A or B. if there are points a E A and b E B any deleted a and b (not including Perhaps adding an application-dependent constraint on the distance between A and B. 4.6. Summary Thus, the new model of boundaries logical properties described required for certain applications used as a constraint on relations between allows us to insist and regions in Section 3. It allows regions in artificial intelligence. faithfully models the desired topo- to touch without overlap, to be (e.g. changes over time). And it It also allows isotopy two models that all functions used in reasoning models be continuous. 5. Some approaches that don’t work The new model for boundaries departs significantly it suggests because intelligence, that, in our intuitive models, space from current practice in artificial itself changes as ’ Using the standard definition of the distance between two sets A and B: inf{d(x,g) 1 x E A, y E B}, where d( x, y) is the distance between two points. M.M. Fleck/Artijicial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 15 literature the scene changes. One might ask whether a less drastic solution could be used. The they do not work, it recent is instructive in Section 4 and why they fail to have the desired properties. approaches. Although to see how they differ from the new model proposed suggests several alternative 5.1. Selecirive violations of continuity have been of function The violations continuity them failure of to be only the IR” model. We could handle except at a limited set of locations. For any function piecewise ‘continuous, from one in which functions are individually, continuous functions have the same domain, e.g. color, depth, and texture data for a common 2D image, and when region connectedness the most conspicuous functions and space is disconnected. Differences (as in [ 561) by allowing appear when multiple it is impossible i.e. continuous is considered. to distinguish this analysis licenses to exhibit in the domain it, there may be changes sharp changes at roughly it is common the same and computer vision applications, and (if the cup has just been put there) for functions with the In reasoning locations. For example, same domain in color, intensity, between a coffee cup and the table below In temperature. texture, m,aterial composition, the new model, a boundary (but does not require) abrupt changes in the values of all functions at the boundary. Thus, it produces a compact representation the (plausible) for the cup and table, and suggests also change at their boundary. function are independent most naturally compact change at a common One might, of course, some additional piecewise continuity model but this seems ad hoc. that other properties might in one in other functions and discontinuities would functions. This yields a less to prediction In the piecewise continuity model, abrupt changes location, and no prediction about the behavior of other functions. be stored as properties of the individual of the cup and table, no reason to expect different of abrupt changes co-occurrence representation incorporate constraint functions into the A second limitation of the piecewise continuity model is that it says nothing about the cup also fails to be materially occurs at the same location as the in function values e.g. shadows and surface to identify and In raw image data, sharp changes in material connectivity, it is an accepted goal of computer vision algorithms giving only “real” object boundaries to later object identification in connectivity in function values. In the cup and table example, to the table. The break region connectivity. connected sharp changes can occur where there are no breaks markings. However, remove such boundaries, and reasoning. 9 In the new model of boundaries, fail simultaneously, compactly. so it predicts situations continuity like the cup and table and represents and connectedness must them The pie:cewise continuity model requires a distinct-and currently non-existent- model of region connectedness to discontinuities in functions. Some high-level models may contain a primitive CON- NECTED, used to specify whether two regions are connected. However, this is too crude e.g. two regions con- a mechani,sm the full range of different connectivities, for relating breaks in connectivity and some mechanism to describe y Current algorithms are, of course, not particularly successful at doing this, but that is beside the point. 16 M.M. FIeck/Art@cial Intelligence 80 (1996) l-27 Fig. 11. There may be more than two types of regions in a scene. There may be two types of objects e.g. edible and nonedible (left), plus the background. Two regions of free space may differ in properties, e.g. a change in refractive index creates a boundary at which light rays change direction (right), but remain distinct from regions filled by objects. in two distinct places or along a ring, a region netted boundary. touching itself along an internal 5.2. Same points as W” Suppose the points that we keep the same points as lP and just alter the open sets. When regions are adjacent, them. The points must belong region with strange properties: most processing undefined values on its points (a “truth gap”) property values between belong regions to both regions because then overlap. lo two in their common boundary must be divided between to one of the two regions, otherwise we create an extra its existence and functions have in (e.g. they are different colors), a point cannot the ignores [2,10,21,30]. If there is a change values. Furthermore, the two regions two conflicting this creates Thus, there are two basic ways to allocate the boundary points (see Fig. 7). We can (the asymmetrical model). Or, we can divide the two regions, e.g. 50% to each region, chosen randomly from our inventory of open sets, all sets that space is not a subspace of lP, a problem change to one region In both cases, the resulting give all boundary points them in some way between (the random model). We then remove, cross a boundary. since this prevents us from using The random model shares requires an algorithm ifolds. The asymmetrical model get the boundary points. Some authors [22,59] regions and not to empty space regions. Digital the points when the same type (Fig. 6), or regions which touch themselves to the region currently of interest. However, isotopy the further than two types of regions there are more (Section 4.2). for deciding which region to model continuous technical defect that the regions are not man- is to to object topology can be interpreted as assigning these algorithms do not work regions of suggest assigning the points (Fig. 11)) contact between (Figs. l-2). Alternatively, the points its topology assign an integer to the region above or to the left. However, one could [ 36,411 assign boundary points based on directions, e.g. give that a region changes regions, we could if there are no self-touching to all regions and give the points to the region with the lower number. if rotated. Alternatively, this means 1o Redefining the term “overlap” as in [ 8,9] is possible but ad hoc. M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) l-27 17 a Fig. 12. At a four-way junction, the black regions are connected if the center point is assigned to them. Otherwise, the white regions are connected. However, many regions will not be manifolds as it breaks or comes changes in the assignment and the topology of a region may change (Fig. 12), is connected. ” junctions of the center point alter which pair of regions into contact with other regions. At four-way 5.3. Integers and hyperreals [48] for high-level reasoning. These models allow abrupt changes Integers or integer grids are often used in computer vision proposed values across boundaries the standard definitions notions within regions. continuous other topological JR” for the purposes of the current discussion. and occasionally in function to one another. However, the intuitive to another space are to impose structures on integer grids [ 321 but this simply causes them to act like and adjacent regions are not connected of topological from the integers is connected. concepts do not accurately model In particular, all functions subset of the integers and no nontrivial It is possible [41,44] ‘* reasoning [55] (as assumed for qualitative An interesting recent proposal perreals as a model of time. In the order topology behave much to x is open. Thus, any set of real points, close because functions on the hyperreals can have abrupt jumps continuous it can be decomposed to them, like the integers. For each real value x, the set of points together with the hyperreals is open. Therefore, no region of non-infinitesimal into two disjoint open intervals. Furthermore, involves using the hy- in [ 551) , the hyperreals close that are infinitely is connected, continuous infinitely length in value “at” any real number, e.g. a function can have the value 1 on all reals in (-00, a) but 0 on all reals in [a,m). statements that certain This conclusion may seem at odds with the standard hyperreal method for proving a real function continuous. The continuity proofs depend on a transfer principle which if the corre- guarantees is sponding restricted definitions only constrains to real functions, not arbitrary hyperreal topological the transfer principle to correspond functions. More general versions of the transfer statements to statements which quantify over the reals, whereas the reals are true are true. This transfer principle, however, over sets of reals. Furthermore, about the hyperreals the behavior of those hyperreal functions which happen require quantification the standard if and only about lJ In the new model, neither pair of regions is connected. l2 A full discussion of such models is interesting but beyond the scope of this paper. 18 M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) l-27 Fig. 13. Qualitative reasoning systems model a limit point L using three regions: below L, at L, and above L (top). The new models can represent these values using an immediate transition from above L to below L, i.e. two qualitative regions separated by a boundary (middle), or a third region, near L, can be added (bottom). principle limited. exist [27] but they do not alter the basic fact that the transfer principle is 6. Worked examples in modelling The new model handles boundaries sibilities explore how some standard analyses can be re-written using the models can be used to develop new, simpler analyses of data that was previously puzzling. some new pos- some familiar methods difficult. This section will the new models and how in an unfamiliar way, allowing and making 6.1. Crossing limits without limit points from limit point typically A system for reasoning states that could immediately 22,31,33,34,36,55,56] qualitative point, typical a moving object might hit. The system establishes working about the qualitative behavior of processes over time [ 19,20, is given the initial state of a system and and must work out all the next limit follow it. This is done by finding that each property value could reach. A that sequences of events by i.e. important qualitative limit point might be the boiling point of water or the location of an obstacle transition point, all possible to limit point, building up a graph of possible states, represent a limit point B by breaking regions regions: These systems thin region. Instead, one can use two qualitative three qualitative infinitely separated by a boundary. This would be appropriate when values change rapidly the limit value, or when some discrete change will indicate to B (e.g. the opacity of water indicating are expected one would (Fig. 13). This water algorithms the space of values into (-00, B), [B] , and (B, CO). The new models cannot create an (-00, B) and (B, co) through the relationship of the value it is below the freezing point). When values error of B for nontrivial periods of time, (-co, B - E), (B - E, B + E), and (B + E, CO) for the boiling point of a water, because boiling low-level data analysis (e.g. in computer vision) can easily produce 3-valued sign data of this type. regions by bound- structure of space Some readers may wonder why I have separated distinct qualitative in this paper have concentrated on the topological instead use three regions: is a sensible model in a container will vary noticably to remain within measurement in temperature. Also, aries. Most examples M.M. Fleck/Art$icial Intelligence 80 (1996) l-27 19 Fig. 14. The process of heating bulk water until it boils away can be modelled using a map from time to temperatures and a map from temperatures to states of matter. and time, but similar arguments are distinguished as qualitatively tinuously state of bulk water depends on temperature. Since crete set, this can only be a continuous map if there are boundaries temperatures. event boundaries apply also to property spaces. Ranges of temperatures different because some other property changes discon- as a function of temperature. For example, Fig. 14 shows how the physical states are a finite, dis- in the space of induce The boundaries in time. in temperature of qualitative the physical space then regions To use the new models, we could describe to time. Initially, the qualitative reasoner as a process which time is represented as having no boundaries. gradually adds boundaries The reasoning continuous a connected because the representation process moving is not consistent. finds the limit point that each continuous set under a continuous that would require a change function in the qualitative towards a limit point cannot cross it, because process is moving towards. A the image of is connected. Nor can it halt or turn back, sign of its derivative. Therefore, that could get in trouble, thle limit point and adds a boundary Each step in limit analysis detects when the system could next become stuck in this that the system in and starts states instanta- way. For each process crosses state. It then figures out what else might change at this temporal boundary up the new processes last for intervals of nontrivial neously. for the next interval of time. In this analysis, all qualitative it then hypothesizes to license length and all changes between the abrupt change states occur to time 6.2. Equilibria without exact equality equally [ 191 represents about equilibria For example, Forbus can also be rewritten Reasoning than boundaries. qualitative: states in which values are perturbed then returned single-point limit point, dividing To expllain why regions, L_ below so that L = L- U L+ contains fast to exact equality. exact equality. the property space into two qualitative the equilibrium the limit point and L+ above region representing indistinguishable all points is stable, we first extract an equilibrium so as to use region edges rather as a cycle of for “an instant” and In the new models, we cannot create a Instead, we must place a boundary at the from exact equality regions (Fig. 15). it. The length of the borders the borders of the two is set the limit point given from 20 MM. Fleck/ArtiJCcial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 Fig. 15. The new representation of equilibrium splits the property space with a boundary at the point of exact equality. We then identify two regions, L- and L +. which are borders adjacent to the boundary. level). inherent errors. Errors will occur both due to limitations in the theoretical model In L_, a restoring process moves the prevailing and approximations perfectly with L+. In L+, a restoring process moves Therefore, no matter which of the two sub-states it is in, the system cannot can only shuttle between L_ and L+. In other words, the system maintains up to measurement devices is not the boundary the boundary with L-. leave L but equilibrium (e.g. water in a container the value towards in measurement the value towards error. 6.3. Verb classes Recent work in linguistic verbs and verbal constituents semantics into four types. A verbal constituent may be either: [ 2,10,37,47,50,51,53] has classified English 0 a state, l an activity l a state change l an accomplishment (a pattern of change (traditionally in state over time), called an “achievement”), or (an activity ending in, and causing, a state change). Some examples of the different types are: like mathematics, own a car, l states: be green, l activities: swim, drive a car, shred documents, l state changes: reach the finish line, find a free terminal, pass an exam, l accomplishments: build a house, do a problem set, make a pot of coffee. it can occur [ 10, pp. 55-60 and 1841 and [ 511). Based on a fuller analysis of The type of a verb or verb phrase affects the syntactic and semantic contexts in (see in particular tense and aspect phenomena present) activities. When I treat progressive, perfect, and habitual verb forms as states and homogeneous actions such as “fall” or “stand” as in the same sequence of events, two actions occur [ 12,131, (simple how they can overlap in time the classes of the verb phrases overlap strained. Previous descriptions cases for the two types of predicates. Using generate unified explanations. [ 2,11,24,25,49,5 involved. State changes and accomplishments 1,571. These constraints there are constraints on depend on can only is largely uncon- require separate the new models of boundaries, we can though in limited ways, whereas overlap among states and activities insightful, of these phenomena, Specifically, I will model a state or activity as occupying internal boundaries), whereas a state change or an accomplishment (no interval containing the two borders adjacent after the change. An accomplishment one or more internal boundaries just enough to a boundary, occupies a connected a connected region of time occupies an (Fig. 16). A state change occupies the states before and time to observe length, interval of nontrivial M.M. Fleck/Art@ial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 21 Fig. 16. Modlzls of the four verb classes: state or activity (lower middle, bottom). (top), state change (upper middle), accomplishment in a state change and possibly ending those used by previous authors except for the topological details around It is important from the action order to describe that the representations (here represented by the border region the semantics of perfect verb forms [ 12,13,29,57]. of accomplishments following include the boundaries. the state resulting in the state change) starting with one. l3 These models are similar to In the new models, the presence or absence of boundaries in any one model of a situation. Let us hypothesize together affects how actions can fit that Constraint 4. A description of a sequence of events in English can typically be inter- preted using only one model, with a consistent assignment of boundary locations. If this constraint holds, a boundary that another action specifies as connected, interval two situation models. specified by one action cannot fall during an since this would require constructing In English discourse, a sequence of events can be indicated using explicit connectives the case of the temporal connective [ 24,571 or implicitly by the order of sentences “when”. We can represent temporal [ 11,251. Let us consider its meaning as: “when X, Y” or “Y, when X” means that X and Y occur over overlapping of time Zx and Zr such that no part of Zr is earlier than all of Ix. intervals The temporal with the c~onstraints imposed by the boundary models. allowed by “when” relations follow from the interaction of this meaning tlo overlap this means Because states and activities contain no internal boundaries, As a verb can refer to any interval which matches such interval, required overlap a istate change: patterns. A state or activity can overlap its main interval accomplishment, change. they can overlap freely. the maximal that two states or activities connected by “when” are merely a state or activity must simply temporal fill the main interval of the interval with a state It cannot start or end during interrupting the specific verbs in Sentences 7-8 favor two different (Sentences 9-10). because the end state of an accomplishment its meaning, not just 6). Similarly, that would (Sentence the main in time and/or imply I3 It is not clear whether types of accomplishments, there is a state change at the start of an accomplishment. Or, whether there are two one with the state change and one without it. 22 MM. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) I-27 Sentence 6. The heating was on when I was in the library. Sentence 7. Mirabelle was married when she passed her driving test. Sentence 8. Mirabelle was happy when she passed her driving test, Sentence 9. When Mike ran up the stairs, he was exhausted. Sentence 10. When Mike ran up the stairs, they were covered in snow. By contrast, if two state changes or accomplishments the presence or absence of boundaries. So Sentence 11 has two possible two state changes might have happened second action overlaps succession. links to one another. they would naturally be interpreted In either case, the ending at exactly state of the first, i.e. the actions happened they must agree about readings. The the same time. Or, the start of the in quick tight causal as having overlap, Sentence 11. The bomb exploded when Curtis pushed the button. property of boundary also explains the “subinterval” If a homogeneous state or activity holds over an interval, from state changes and accomplishments assignment states and activities Consistency used to distinguish 49,501. subinterval. By contrast, if a state change or accomplishment holds only over those subintervals which still have the correct pattern of boundaries. facts distinguish mass nouns, which refer to types of stuff, from count mouns, Similar which refer to objects: a subset of water is still water, but a subset of a table is not [ 1,501) . A slight complication is that many activity verbs and necessarily on their intervals. So, for example, mass nouns a region of space only contains selection of cake, raisins, and nuts also [ 5,37, it holds over every it a table (cf. impose minimum if it contains a representative holds over an interval, requirements “fruitcake” length [ 501. 6.4. Splitting and merging One feature of the new boundary model together (connected) (not connected). The process of grafting clearly. The pieces of plant involved two regions which are fused adjacent distinction after they are brought make this transition much more quickly, instantaneously the microwave but the two pieces separate only when someone is quite deeply embedded is that it makes a sharp distinction between and two regions which are merely in Fig. 17, shows the in the graft only fuse together sometime (e.g. pudding) fusing in in some cases (e.g. water) effectively upon contact. Similar processes occur in reverse, e.g. a plate cracks into contact with one another. Other materials in our intuitive models of the world. Many tries to pick it up. trees, illustrated This distinction English verbs clearly indicate which type of action they refer to: l changes l changes in contact only: put into, stack, hang on, remove from, take off of, in connectivity: fuse, glue, merge, cut, saw off, split, tear. M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 23 Fig. 17. In grafting, a tree branch is brought into contact with a stump. After a while, they grow together. Fig. 18. Two nested tables do not form a single table. Even if their exterior boundBry has the correct shape, there is an extraneous internal boundary. We can model this distinction by providing models. The first type moves regions and/or boundaries, reshapes of boundary. two types of high-level operations for altering shrinks or enlarges regions, and isotopies. The second type adds or deletes sections regions using 01: rearranges This distinction helps explain the “concatenation” property sometimes used to distin- state changes and accomplish- the union of two objects In general, [ 4,37,49,51]. from states and activities from mass nouns, and to distinguish guish count nouns is ments tables do not form a table. The two not an objiect of the same type, e.g. two adjacent can be distinguished (Fig. 18). By contrast, two adjacent piles of sand form a single pile of sand, because piles of sand fuse on I and build another house over the contact. Similarly, I U J. adjacent I and then again over interval J, you can also However, if you sing Bach over interval I U J. be said to have sung Bach over interval interval J, you cannot be said to have built a (single) house over interval if you build a house over interval by whether an internal boundary is present 6.5. Digitized isotopy As discussed notion of isotopy above, because to model constraints on deformation of one representation the new models are subspaces of IV’, we can use the into another. 24 M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 Fig. 19. Two nearly aligned images (top) are brought into correspondence by enlarging the boundaries in each image, using isotopies of the regions. This process converts both images to a common form (bottom), so the images must be isotopic to one another. in a stereo matching This idea has been implemented surface markings in the two images must be isotopic. Together with other constraints must match dark regions), is a possible match [ 141. When a pattern of is projected onto the left and right images of a stereo pair, the regions (e.g. dark regions this can be used to identify when a patch of the left image system In general, to a patch of the right image. to tell whether it is quite difficult level of stereo matching, we can assume two corresponding regions occupy overlapping tries to eliminate mis-matches between (Fig. 19). Where mis-matches an isotopy between in Section 4.1 provides an exact correspondence two scenes are isotopic. However, in that the two images are aligned regions of the the are completely eliminated by the two scenes. The digitized the the images by enlarging between the bottom almost correctly. Thus, plane. The matcher boundaries this process, boundary model given digitized operations used in implementation images. there must exist (locally) in each image and continuous isotopies of the underlying This technique has also been used in building a fast algorithm requires regions [ 171. Because this algorithm images are initially detected using a sub-sampled localized boundaries are expanded to thick boundaries locations are refined on the basis of high resolution for finding boundaries to be at least 12 pixels version of the image. These at full image resolution. information, intensity in textured wide, boundaries poorly The boundary using the digitized isotopy operations to prevent changes in the image topology. 7. Conclusions We have seen how topological properties have been, and could be, used in a wide algorithms. Standard models of space and time, based on R”, were structure at object or event boundaries. New models in the boundaries. A range of reasoning shown to have the wrong topological with an appropriate topology were constructed by deleting points M.M. Fleck/Artificial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 25 reasoning algorithms number of worked examples were presented, standard phenomena properly modelled by previous authors new analyses based on change or lack of change split and merger of regions). matching, (e.g. verb classes), provide (e.g. qualitative (e.g. regions illustrating reasoning), how the new models support analysis of some that could not be simplify for situations formal models in contact), in scene topology and suggest interesting (e.g. isotopy-based Acknowledgements for the MIT Artificial Institute of Technology, the Department of Engineering This research was carried out at the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory of the Mas- sachusetts Science of the Uni- versity of Oxford, and the Department of Computer Science of the University of Iowa. Support research Intelligence Laboratory’s in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of was provided Defense under Office of Naval Research contract N00014-85-K-0124. The author was also supported by the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation, by the AT&T Bell Laboratories Graduate Research Program for Women, and by a junior British Pe.troleum. funded by intelligence fellowship research artificial This paper covers a wide range of material and many people have given me pointers and suggestions. Particularly memorable help came from Mike Brady, David Chapman, Bruce Donald, George Fleck, Ken Forbus, Ken Hale, Jim Henle, Rich Zippel, topology group at Iowa, and an anonymous responsible the reviewer. None of them, of course, are for any errors in this paper. References [ I] K. Allan, Nouns and countability, Language 56 (3) (1980) 541-567. [ 21 J.F. Allen, Towards a general model of action and time, Artif: Intell. 23 (2) (1984) 123-154. [3] J.F. Allen and PJ. Hayes, A common-sense theory of time, in: Proceedings IJCAI-85, LOS Angeles, CA (1985) 528531. [4] E. Bach, The algebra of events, Linguist. Philos. 9 (1) (1986) 5-16. [5] M. Bennett and B. Partee, Toward the Logic of Tense and Aspect in English (Indiana University Linguistics Club, 1978). [6] J.M. Elrady and H. Asada, Smoothed local symmetries and their implementation, Inr. J. Robotics Res. 3 (3) (.l984) 36-61. [ 71 J.F. Canny, A computational approach to edge detection, IEEE Trans. Cornput. Vision Pattern Recognition 8 (6) (1986) 679-698. [ 81 E. Davis, An ontology of physical action, Technical Report #123, Computer Science, Courant Institnte, New York University, New York ( 1984). [9] E. Davis, Shape and function of solid objects: some examples, Technical Report #137, Computer Science, Courant Institute, New York University, New York (1984). [ lo] D.R. Dowty, Word Meaning and Montague Grammar (Reidel, Dordmcht, Netherlands, 1979). [ 111 D.R. Dowty, The effects of aspectual class on the temporal structure of discourse: semantics or pragmatics?, Linguist. Philos. 9 (1) (1986) 37-61. [ 121 M.M. Fleck, Boundaries and topological algorithms, Ph.D. Thesis, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, MIT, AI Laboratory TR 1065, Cambridge, MA ( 1988). 26 M.M. Fleck/Art@cial Intelligence 80 (1996) 1-27 [ 131 M.M. Fleck, Topological models for space and time, OUEL Report No. 1860/90, Oxford University, Department of Engineering Science ( 1990). [ 141 M.M. Fleck, A topological [ 151 M.M. Fleck, Some defects (3) ( 1992) 337-345. stereo matcher, hr. J. Comput. Vision 6 (3) in finite-difference edge finders, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 14 (1991) 197-226. [ 161 M.M. Fleck, Texture: plus Ga change Lecture Notes in Computer Science 588 (Springer-Verlag. . ., in: Proceedings European Conference on Computer Vision, Berlin, 1992) 151-159. [ 171 M.M. Fleck, Practical edge finding with a robust estimator, in: Proceedings IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Seattle, WA (1994) 649-653. [ 18 ] M.M. Fleck, Shape and the wide-angle image, Technical Report 94-04, Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA ( 1994). theory, Art% Inrell. 24 (1984) 85-168. [ 191 K.D. Forbus, Qualitative process [20] K.D. Forbus, The logic of occurrence, 1211 Instants and intervals, l-36. for liquids, Semantics of English in: J.R. Hobbs and R.C. Moore, eds., Formal Theories in: J.R. Hobbs and R.C. Moore, eds., Formal Theories temporal connectives, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Texas, Austin, in: Proceedings IJCAI-87, Milan, Italy (1987) 409-415. C.L. Hamblin, in: J.T. Fraser, EC. Haber, and G.H. Miiller, eds., The Study of Time, Firsf Conference of the International Society for the Study of %ne (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1972) 324-33 1. PJ. Hayes, Naive physics 1: ontology of the Commonsense World (Ablex, Norwood, NJ, 1985) 71-107. P.J. Hayes, The second naive physics manifesto, of the Commonsense World ( Ablex, Norwood, NJ, 1985) 0. Heiniimtii, TX ( 1974); distributed by the Indiana University Linguistics Club ( 1978). E. Himichs, Temporal anaphora J.E. Hopcroft C.K. Yap, eds., Algorithmic and Geometric Aspects of Robotics, Advances Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1987) 7-43. R.F. Hoskins, Srandard and Nonstandard Analysis (Ellis-Horwood, J.F.P. Hudson, Piecewise Linear Topology (Benjamin, New York, 1969). M.R. Johnson, A unified Tense and Aspect, Syntax and Semantics 14 (Academic Press, New York, 1981) 145-175. H. Kamp, Events, Semantics from Di’rent Points of View (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1979) 376-417. J. de Kleer and J.S. Brown, A qualitative physics based on confluences, Artif Intell. 24 (1984) 7-83. T.Y. Kong and R. Kopperman, A topological to digital topology, Amer. Math. Monthly 98 (10) (1991) 901-917. B.J. Kuipers, Commonsense in discourses of English, Linguist Philos. 9 ( 1) (1986) 63-82. for computer in: R. Bluerle, U. Egli and A. von Stechow, eds., and D.B. Krafft, The challenge of robotics reasoning about causality: deriving behavior in: I?J. Tedeschi and A. Zaenen, eds., Chichester, England, 1990). theory of tense and aspect, from structure, Art$ Intell. 24 in Robotics 1 (Lawrence in: J.T. Schwartz and instants and temporal reference, approach temporal science, IEEE Trans. about processes in one dimension, and plans, Cognitive Sci. 6 (1982) (1987) 341-355. for reasoning (1984) 169-203. B.J. Kuipers, Qualitative simulation, Artif: Intell. 29 (1986) 289-338. Y. Leclerc and S.W. Zucker, The local structure of image discontinuities Pattern Annl. Much. Intell. 9 (3) logic D. McDermott, A temporal 101-155. A.P.D. Mourelatos, Events, processes and states, in: PJ. Tedeschi and A. Zaenen, eds., Tense and Aspect, Syntax and Semantics 14 (Academic Press, New York, 1981) 191-212. J.R. Munkres, Topology: A First Course (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1975). J.R. Munkres, Elements of Algebraic Topology (Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, CA, 1984). J.A. Noble, Descriptions University of Oxford T. Pavlidis, Structural Pattern Recognition ( Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977). D.E. Pearson and J.A. Robinson, Visual communication 795-812. S.B. Pollard, J.E.W. Mayhew and J.F! Frisby, PMF: a stereo correspondence gradient A. Rosenfeld, Digital topology, Amer. Math. Monthly 86 (6) (1979) 621-630. at very low data rates, Proc. IEEE 73 (1985) limit, Perception 14 (1985) 449-470. surfaces, D.Phil. Thesis, Department algorithm using a disparity of ( 1989). of Engineering Science, image [221 [=I u41 [251 [261 [271 [281 1291 [301 [311 1321 [331 1341 1351 [361 I371 [381 1391 1401 [411 [421 1431 [Ml M.M. Fleck/ Artificial Intelligence 80 (I 996) 1-27 27 [ 45] C.P. Rourke and B.J. Sanderson, Introduction to Piecewise-Linear Topology (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982). [ 46] T.B. Rushing, Topological Embeddings (Academic Press, New York, 1973). [ 47] G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind (Barnes and Noble, London, 1949). [ 48] Y. Shoham, Reasoning about change: time and causation from the standpoint of artificial intelligence, Ph.D. Thesis, Report YALEU/CSD/RR #507, Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT (1987). [ 49] Y. Shoham, Temporal logics in AI: semantical and ontological considerations,Artif. Intel!. 33 ( 1) ( 1987) 89-104. [50] B. Taylor, Tense and continuity, Linguist. Philos. 1 (1977) 199-220. [51] C.L. Tenny, Grammaticalizing aspect and affectedness, Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, Cambridge, MA (1987). [52] J.F.A.K. van Benthem, The Logic of Time (Reidel, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1983). f 53] Z. Vend1er, Linguistics in Philosophy (Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1967). [54] D.D. Weld, The use of aggregation in causal simulation, Artif. Intell. 30 (I) ( 1986) 1-34. [55] D.D. Weld, Exaggeration, Artif. Intel!. 43 (1990) 311-368. [561 B.C. Williams, Qualitative analysis of MOS circuits, Artif. Intel!. 24 (1984) 281-346. [57] E. Woisetschlaeger, A Semantic Theory of the English Auxiliary System, Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, Cambridge, MA; distributed by the Indiana University Linguistics Club (1976). [58] G.H. von Wright, An Essay in Deontic Logic and the General Theory of Action (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1968) . [59] C.K. Yap, Algorithmic motion planning, in: J.T. Schwartz and C.K. Yap, eds., Algorithmic and Geometric Aspects of Robotics, Advances in Robotics 1 (Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1987) 95-145. 