Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Contents lists available at ScienceDirectJournal of Strategic Information Systemsjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsisThe strategic impacts of Intelligent Automation for knowledge andservice work: An interdisciplinary reviewCrispin Coombsa,⁎a School of Business and Economics, Loughborough University, Ashby Road, Loughborough LE11 3TU, UKb Business School, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 5UA, UKc Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK, Donald Hislopb, Stanimira K. Tanevac, Sarah BarnardaTA R T I C L E I N F OA B S T R A C TKeywords:Artificial intelligenceAutomationBusiness valueComputerisationMachine learningMobile roboticsIntroductionA significant recent technological development concerns the automation of knowledge and ser-vice work as a result of advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and its sub-fields. We use the termIntelligent Automation to describe this phenomenon. This development presents organisationswith a new strategic opportunity to increase business value. However, academic research con-tributions that examine these developments are spread across a wide range of scholarly dis-ciplines resulting in a lack of consensus regarding key findings and implications. We conduct thefirst interdisciplinary literature review that systematically characterises the intellectual state anddevelopment of Intelligent Automation technologies in the knowledge and service sectors. Basedon this review, we provide three significant contributions. First, we conceptualise IntelligentAutomation and its associated technologies. Second, we provide a business value-based model ofIntelligent Automation for knowledge and service work and identify twelve research gaps thathinder a complete understanding of the business value realisation process. Third, we provide aresearch agenda to address these gaps.Analysts and commentators have forecast mass unemployment from the automation of a wide range of job roles that involvepredictable, repetitive work (Grace et al., 2018; Makridakis, 2017). The McKinsey Global Institute has claimed that 60% of jobs couldbecome 30% automated by the early 2020s (Chui et al., 2016), while Frey and Osborne (2017) argue that automation could eliminate47% of jobs in the United States economy by 2033. Researchers also predict that Artificial Intelligence (AI) will outperform humans inmany activities in the next ten years (Grace et al., 2018), thereby becoming a practical alternative to human labour (Makridakis,2017). These claims are based on a recent step change in the technological advance of AI. AI is the broad suite of technologies thatcan match or surpass human capabilities, particularly those involving cognition such as learning and problem solving (DeCanio,2016). Applications of AI are wide-ranging and include knowledge reasoning, machine learning, natural language processing,computer vision, and robotics. For clarity, we use the term AI to refer to all these technologies.Advances in AI and its sub-fields have enabled the development of a new form of automation that we describe as IntelligentAutomation1 (the application of AI in ways that can learn, adapt and improve over time to automate tasks that were formally⁎Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: c.r.coombs@lboro.ac.uk (C. Coombs), donald.hislop@abdn.ac.uk (D. Hislop),Stanimira.Taneva@nottingham.ac.uk (S.K. Taneva), s.h.barnard@lboro.ac.uk (S. Barnard).1 We use the term Intelligent Automation throughout this paper, rather than the abbreviation IA, to avoid confusion with AI.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2020.101600Received 1 July 2017; Received in revised form 29 January 2020; Accepted 3 February 2020Available online 09 March 20200963-8687/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600undertaken by a human). Frey and Osborne (2017) observe that algorithms are being developed that would allow cognitive tasks tobe automated. They also state that the application of AI in mobile robotics has extended the opportunity for automation of manualtasks. Cognitive and manual tasks are commonly found in knowledge and service work (Davenport and Kirby, 2016a). Knowledgework is defined as work which is intellectual, creative, and non-routine, and which involves the utilisation and creation of knowledge(Hislop et al., 2018). Knowledge work includes work in a wide range of professional areas, such as information and communication,consulting, pharmacology, and education (Kuusisto and Meyer, 2003). Service work can be defined as the process of using one'sresources (e.g., knowledge) for someone's (self or other) benefit (Barrett et al., 2015). It includes jobs as diverse as working in retail,security, office cleaning, and more knowledge-intensive work such as consulting. Our definition of service work thus includes (white-collar) office and administrative work.Until recently, knowledge and service work tasks have been considered too difficult to automate because they require a highdegree of cognitive flexibility and physical adaptability (Lacity and Willcocks, 2016b). However, the scope and capability of AI hasrecently expanded and is likely to continue to grow (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2016). For example, applications of AI are predicted tosignificantly reduce the need for humans to translate languages (by 2024), drive a truck (by 2027), work in retail (by 2031), and workas surgeons (by 2053) (Grace et al., 2018). Frey and Osborne (2017) predict that most office and administrative support work, as wellas a substantial proportion of service work in the US, is likely to be automated. In which case, the advance of AI will create dramaticchanges to the supply of knowledge and service work (Loebbecke and Picot, 2015). It is this impact on knowledge and service workthat sets this change apart from previous technological revolutions, such as the industrialisation of factory work in the 19th century,or the adoption of transactional computers for administrative and service work in the late 20th century (Davenport and Kirby,2016b). This review focuses on knowledge and service work to examine the transformational effects of Intelligent Automation insectors that have previously been relatively untouched by automation compared to other industries, such as manufacturing(Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011).The transformation of knowledge and service work presents organisations with a new strategic opportunity to increase businessvalue. Recent advances in AI could enable organisations to create new business value opportunities through the application ofIntelligent Automation to middle-income cognitive jobs (Manyika et al., 2017). Alternatively, organisations may opt to substitute newAI capital for high-skilled labour or choose to reassign high-skilled workers to focus more exclusively on the most complex, non-routine cognitive tasks (Davenport and Kirby, 2016a). However, there is considerable disagreement regarding the possible impacts ofAI on knowledge and service work. Makridakis (2017) identified four contrasting perspectives: optimists that predict a utopian futureof AI (e.g., Kurzweil, 2005); pessimists that predict a dystopian future where AI reduces humans to a second rate status (e.g., Bostrom,2014); pragmatists that predict AI will augment human skills (e.g., Markoff, 2016); and doubters that predict that AI will never beable to replicate human intelligence (e.g., Jankel, 2015). This lack of consensus means that there is little coherent guidance regardingthe new strategies that need to be developed to realise business value from Intelligent Automation. Thus, there is a pressing need forresearch that examines the latest advances in AI and considers their impact on the application of Intelligent Automation for businessvalue.A valuable source of guidance for strategic perspectives on Intelligent Automation is current academic knowledge. Numerousstudies, many employing sound rigorous methods, consider the potential impacts of AI on work. However, these contributions aresituated in a wide range of scholarly disciplines that draw on contrasting research paradigms, theories, methods, and perspectives,resulting in a lack of consensus regarding critical findings and implications. Operating at the intersection of many scholarly dis-ciplines, considering both social and technical aspects, IS researchers are well placed to assemble a cohesive understanding of thisemerging research challenge. Thus, this paper aims to inform researchers of the current state (state of the art) of research relating tothe application of Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service work.To assist the IS research community in navigating this complex domain, this paper provides a scoping review of existing academicliterature (Paré et al., 2015). Scoping reviews focus on breadth rather than depth of coverage in the literature. They describe andsummarise the size and nature of the literature on a particular topic and allow researchers to identify research gaps in the extantliterature (see, for example, Smith et al., 2011). The advantage of this approach is to offer a comprehensive view of the researchlandscape. This review explores the potential impacts of Intelligent Automation through the classification of AI research related toknowledge and service work published between January 2011 and December 2017. We focused our review on knowledge and servicework for two reasons. First, the most significant developments associated with the work-related use of AI have been in occupationsthat have hitherto made little use of them, such as the knowledge and service industries (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011; Loebbeckeand Picot, 2015). Second, the late 20th century and the start of this century has witnessed a significant growth of employment inknowledge and service work, and a decline in jobs in manufacturing sectors in advanced economies (Castells, 1998; Hislop et al.,2018). To provide a business value perspective, we utilised the strategic IS business value literature to guide our review (Schryen,2013). We address the salient features of the Intelligent Automation field regarding the generation of business value from knowledgeand service work that will serve as a roadmap for future research.Our review provides three important contributions to the literature. First, we conceptualise Intelligent Automation and review thetechnologies that enable it. This conceptualisation is essential because academic and media articles are characterised by inconsistentuse of terminology regarding the automation of knowledge and service work. Second, based on our review of the literature, wepresent a business value-based model of Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service work and identify twelve crucial researchgaps that hinder a complete understanding of the business value process. Third, we provide a research agenda to address theseresearch gaps. These contributions respond to calls to synthesise the current state of academic knowledge across multiple disciplinesregarding automation of knowledge and service work (Loebbecke and Picot, 2015; Newell and Marabelli, 2015).The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we define Intelligent Automation and discuss the2C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600technologies that enable it. We then briefly discuss the IS business value literature that guided our review framework and analysis.After explaining the method for our interdisciplinary scoping review, we adopt a business value perspective to present our findings.Based on our analysis, we then offer a business value-based model of Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service work,critically discuss key research gaps, and provide an agenda for future research.Conceptualising Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service workIn this section, we discuss our definition of Intelligent Automation and the technologies that enable it.Scholars have proposed a variety of terms to describe the application of computer technologies to automate work tasks. Some ofthe most commonly applied terms include computerisation, virtualisation, and automation. Computerisation has been used byeconomists to describe the substitution of human labour by computers to complete tasks since the computer revolution of the 20thcentury (Autor et al., 2003). Frey and Osborne (2017: p254) extend the definition to include the latest technological advances in AIdescribing computerisation as the “automation of jobs by means of computer-controlled equipment such as machine learning andmobile robotics”. By contrast, McAfee and Brynjolfsson (2017) use ‘virtualisation’ to describe transactions and interactions that usedto take place between people in the physical world that are now completed via digital interfaces. For example, the Eatsa restaurantallows a customer to order and receive a meal without having to speak or interact with a human. Thus, this transaction may beconsidered to have become ‘virtualised’ (McAfee and Brynjolfsson, 2017). Automation is an established term from Ergonomics andHuman Computer Interaction research. Automation has been defined as “the execution by a machine agent (usually a computer) of afunction that was previously carried out by a human” (Parasuraman, 1997: p231). Davenport and Kirby (2016b) have chosen ‘au-tomation’ as the term to describe the use of AI as a substitute for knowledge and service workers. They argue that it is the applicationof AI to automate knowledge and service tasks that set the current transformation apart from ‘traditional’ automation of repetitive,manual tasks in sectors such as manufacturing.However, all these terms struggle to fully encompass the recent step change in intelligent technology advancements and the newopportunities for replacing human labour in knowledge and service work. Computerisation has the merit of being an established termin the economics literature, but it fails to capture, in our view, the transformational aspect of recent advances in AI. Virtualisationpresents a more future-focused image of computing, but it is a term widely used in the Computer Science literature for a differentphenomenon, about virtual (rather than actual) versions of computer resources (Ali and Meghanathan, 2011). Thus, the use of'virtualisation' to describe the substitution of human work by AI is likely to confuse with established research terminology. Finally,although automation is an established concept and reflects the replacement of humans by machines, referring to computers auto-mating work does not encapsulate the radical transformation of work that AI may enable. What differentiates automation in the 21stcentury with automation in the 20th century is the use of computer technologies that may be described as ‘intelligent’ (Davenport andKirby, 2015). The latest advances in AI are demonstrating striking abilities to learn and improve, adapting and increasing perfor-mance over time through exposure to greater amounts of data or increasing experience of attempting to complete a task (Brynjolfssonand McAfee, 2016). While these advances do not equate to human levels of intelligence (Aleksander, 2017), they are demonstratingnew cognitive capabilities that can substitute for humans in some knowledge and service work tasks (Davenport and Kirby, 2015).Thus, we define Intelligent Automation as the use of technologies, (e.g., AI and its sub-fields), to replace human capabilities, par-ticularly those involving cognition such as learning and problem solving, for the execution of work tasks that were previously carriedout by a human. Intelligent Automation differs from previous forms of automation in that AI machines can learn, adapt and improveover time. In the following section, we define the technologies that enable the Intelligent Automation of knowledge and service work.Technologies for Intelligent AutomationResearch in AI has been undertaken since the 1970s with early developments in decision support systems (DSS) and expertsystems (ES) (El-Najdawi and Stylianou, 1993). However, in recent years, game-changing progress has been made in addressing someof the fundamental challenges of the AI discipline. Advances have been made in Natural Language Processing, Machine Learning, andComputer Vision (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2016). The rapid growth in the availability and accessibility of big data combined withvast computing power, readily available through the cloud, have aided these developments (Davenport and Kirby, 2016b). Theserecent advances in AI are creating a new generation of systems that are distinct from the early DSS and knowledge-based systems inthree respects.grammers to make adjustments.• First, the old systems could not automatically learn and improve their methods and results and were reliant on human pro-• Second, the old systems functioned as assistants or advisors to human professionals providing recommendations or advice, but• Third, while these systems were designed to help managers with repetitive decisions and complex unstructured problems, theythey required a human worker to apply the decision.were not designed to remove cognitive tasks from the workload of the human.Thus, although the recent advances in AI may be considered a further evolution and extension of the original AI field, theirwidespread adoption in organisations presents a fundamentally different landscape to what came before. Table 1 summarises theseearly AI applications and their limitations.To investigate the application of Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service work we were guided by the highly cited work3C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Table 1Early applications of AI and associated limitations.ApplicationDescriptionLimitationsDecision Support System(DSS)A set of tools utilising models and or analytic techniques toassist managers in their decision-making (El-Najdawi andStylianou, 1993).Expert Systems (ES)Knowledge ManagementSystems (KMS)Systems designed to capture the knowledge of humanexperts in a narrow problem domain, and help solveproblems (El-Najdawi and Stylianou, 1993).Support the creation, transfer, and application of knowledgein an organisation (Alavi and Leidner, 2001).Recommendation Agent (RA)Software agents that capture the preferences of customersand make recommendations based on these preferences(Xiao and Benbasat, 2007).It contains the knowledge of human experts in solvingparticular problems but is not able to automatically enhancethat knowledge based on the experience of results withouthuman intervention.System designed to support, and not replace, humans (Mallach,2000).Aimed to achieve the flexibility to remove experts fromrepetitive decisions but not to replace human counterparts (El-Najdawi and Stylianou, 1993; Ye and Johnson, 1995).Provides professionals with a support tool to findorganisational knowledge to solve business problems or locatethe relevant internal expertise, but do not implement decisions(Alavi and Leidner, 2001).A human is still required to review the recommendationspresented by an RA and decide which recommendation toapply (Alavi and Leidner, 2001; Xiao and Benbasat, 2007).of Frey and Osborne (2017).2 In their study of how susceptible jobs in the US labour market were to computerisation Frey andOsborne (2017) focused on Machine Learning (ML) and related fields including data mining and machine vision, as well as sub-fieldsof AI that were related to cognitive task automation. They also focused on the application of ML in mobile robotics to consider theautomation of manual tasks. ML refers to the ability of a computer to automatically refine its methods and improve results as itreceives more data (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2016). Frey and Osborne's (2017) study indicates that the recent developments in MLare likely to have significant impacts on knowledge and service work. Consequently, we focused our literature review on the sametechnologies that Frey and Osborne (2017) used in their study. We discuss some of the potential impacts on knowledge and servicework below.Advances in ML are enabling the development of algorithms that allow cognitive tasks found in knowledge and service work, to beautomated (Frey and Osborne, 2017). Frey and Osborne (2017) emphasise the importance of advances in ML that develop algorithmsthat mimic human cognitive functioning. Therefore, ML advances are critical, as once progress has been made regarding machines’ability to build on their knowledge for decision making, real-world applications of automated decision making are likely to follow(Davenport and Kirby, 2016a). For example, ML algorithms are enabling the automation of cognitive tasks such as medical imaginganalysis (Lee et al., 2017), or auditing tasks such as identifying accounting anomalies in unusually high sales figures (Kokina andDavenport, 2017).Combining ML technologies with mobile robotics enables the automation of manual tasks (Frey and Osborne, 2017). There aremany definitions of robotics, and the term is not clearly defined (Dautenhahn, 2013). You and Robert (2018) observe that there isagreement among scholars that embodiment and the representation of embodied behaviours are characteristics that differentiaterobots from other technologies. Thus, we decided to adopt the definition of robots proposed by You and Robert (2018: p 377) as“technologies with both virtual and physical embodied actions”. Mobile robots are being used in various ways in the knowledge andservice sectors. For example, mobile service robots can complete a physical task, such as scrubbing, cleaning, sorting and packaginginstruments (Chen, 2013), pouring a liquid for a human (Xu et al., 2013), or serving meals in a restaurant (Yu et al., 2012). Theserobots may operate autonomously without the need for specific human guidance or intervention. Mobile robots may also enablehumans to complete physical tasks more efficiently, achieving higher levels of accuracy and performance than would have beenpossible relying on human physical capabilities alone, such as robot-assisted surgery (Zaghloul and Mahmoud, 2016).Moreover, some robots achieve human–machine interactions that resemble communication between humans and are referred toas “social robots” (Torras, 2015). Social robots may interact with older adults or clinical patients and even act as support teachers andnannies (e.g., Torras, 2015; Calo et al., 2011). In this paper, we included studies of any robot type (as well as applications of AI or ML)if they were associated with some aspect of knowledge or service work.IS business valueThe delivery of value from IS investments remains a critical strategic issue for organisations. IS business value is defined as “theimpact of investments, in particular, IS assets on the multidimensional performance and capabilities of economic entities at variouslevels, complemented by the ultimate meaning of performance in the economic environment” (Schryen, 2013: p. 141). The im-portance of business value has led to considerable research interest with much of it presenting empirical evidence supporting theoperational and strategic relevance of IS (Schryen, 2013).2 Frey and Osborne originally published their study as an Oxford Martin Programme on Technology and Employment working paper in 2013https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/publications/the-future-of-employment/. The study was published in Technological Forecasting and SocialChange in 2017.4C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600One outcome of this research has been the creation of several IS business value models. Four models that have been particularlyprominent in the IS literature are, 1) IT and Economic Performance Framework (Dedrick et al., 2003); 2) Benefits of IT InvestmentsFramework (Dehning and Richardson, 2002); 3) IT Business Value Model (Melville et al., 2004); and 4) Process Model of IT BusinessValue (Soh and Markus, 1995). Schryen (2013) reviewed these models and demonstrated that they shared common insights. Theseinsights included the recognition that IS investment impacts could be assessed across several performance measures (e.g., businessprocess performance, firm market performance, firm accounting performance); that improvements in business processes and firmperformance are influenced by contextual factors (e.g., firm, industry or country factors); that IS investments and assets can beclassified in different forms (e.g., hardware/software, human IS resources, or IS management capabilities); and that lag effects need tobe accounted for when assessing the impact of IS investments.Drawing on these common insights, Schryen (2013) combined these models to produce a new synthesised model of IS businessvalue. This synthesised model provides a hybrid perspective combining their most useful qualities. Consequently, we decided to useSchryen's (2013) synthesised model of IS business value as a framework to structure our literature analysis, which means that thereview foregrounds an IS business value perspective in its assessment of the literature.Literature reviewTo understand the size and nature of the literature regarding the strategic impacts of Intelligent Automation for knowledge andservice work, we undertook a scoping review of the literature (Paré et al., 2015). Responding to several calls for research that goesbeyond the boundaries of individual academic disciplines (Loebbecke and Picot, 2015; Newell and Marabelli, 2015), we aimed tofocus on breadth rather than depth of literature coverage and in so doing identify research gaps in the extant literature. Schryen's(2013) synthesised model of IS business value indicates that to understand the process of realising business value, four broad ele-ments need to be investigated:(1) IS investment types (e.g., infrastructure and business applications) and complementary non-IS investments (e.g., organisationalstructure, policies and rules, workplace practices);(2) Business process performance (e.g., measures of customer service, flexibility, information sharing) and organisational perfor-mance (e.g., measures of productivity, efficiency, profitability);(3) Context/environmental factors (e.g., industry competitiveness, level of development, population growth rate);(4) Lag effects (e.g., the delay of IS investment effects by years).Schryen (2013) does not provide detailed definitions for all the terms in his synthesised model. Consequently, we referred to oneof the four underpinning IS business value models (IT Business Value Model, Melville et al., 2004) to define the key terms for ourreview framework. These key terms and their definitions are summarised in Table 2.Table 2Definition of key terms used in literature review framework (adapted from Melville et al., 2004; Schryen, 2013).Research QuestionKey termsDefinition1) What Intelligent Automation investments and non-Intelligent Automation investments have been studied?Intelligent automationinvestmentsNon-IntelligentAutomation investments2) How have Intelligent Automation investments influencedBusiness processesbusiness process performance or organisationalperformance?3) How have contextual factors influenced IntelligentAutomation enabled business process performance ororganisational performance?Business processperformanceFirm/ organisationalperformanceContextual factors4) How have lag effects influenced Intelligent AutomationLag effectsenabled business process performance or organisationalperformance?5Technologies such as AI and its sub-fields that can replace humancapabilities, particularly those involving cognition, for theexecution of work tasks that were previously carried out by ahuman.Organisational investments complementary to IntelligentAutomation, e.g. non-IA physical resources, non-IA humanresources, organisational structure, policies and rules, workplacepractices.Activities that underly value-generating processes (transforminginputs to outputs), e.g., inbound logistics, manufacturing, sales,distribution, customer service.Operational efficiency of specific business processes, measures ofwhich include customer service, flexibility, information sharing,and inventory management.Overall firm performance, including productivity, efficiency,profitability, market value, competitive advantage.Factors shaping the way in which Intelligent Automation isapplied within the focal firm to generate business value, includingcompetitiveness, regulation, and/or industry or country factorsshaping Intelligent Automation application and IntelligentAutomation enabled business value generation, including thelevel of development, basic infrastructure, education, researchand development investment, population growth rate, culture,etc.Period that may be several years.C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Fig. 1. Framework for Intelligent Automation Literature Analysis (based on Schryen, 2013).When reviewing our sample literature, we used four research questions to structure our review framework: 1) What IntelligentAutomation investments and non-Intelligent Automation investments have been studied? 2) How have Intelligent Automation in-vestments influenced business process performance or organisational performance? 3) How have contextual factors influencedIntelligent Automation enabled business process performance or organisational performance? 4) How have lag effects influencedIntelligent Automation enabled business process performance or organisational performance? Fig. 1 presents the research frameworkwe adopted with the associated research questions.We followed the three-stage approach for undertaking the literature review advocated by Webster and Watson (2002). First, weselected four bibliographical databases (Scopus; Business Source Complete, PsycINFO and Web of Science) that between them en-compass the academic literature in the fields of science, technology, medicine, social sciences, and arts and humanities, all disciplinesof business, and interdisciplinary research in the behavioural and social sciences. These databases also index the AIS basket of eightjournals. We developed two categories of search terms for interrogating the databases. The first category concerned terms related toIntelligent Automation and associated technologies such as “automation”, “artificial intelligence”, “machine learning”, “cognitivecomputing”, “smart machines”, “mobile robots” and “robot”. The second category included search terms that were related to theeffects or impacts of these technologies and included “innovation”, “business value”, “productivity”, “employment”, “ethics”, “socialimpact” as well as “knowledge work” and “service work”. Within the four databases, search combinations were performed whereeach search combined a technology search term with an impact term using truncation and wildcards.Paré et al. (2015) state that for scoping reviews, inclusion and exclusion criteria must be established to help researchers eliminatestudies that do not address the initial research questions. The initial inclusion criteria for our review were peer-reviewed articles andconference papers published in English from January 2011 – December 2017 that had full text available. We chose to focus ourattention on published research in the last six years for one primary reason. The significant growth in awareness regarding the impactof Intelligent Automation on knowledge and service work can be arguably traced back to significant contributions in 2011 fromBrynjolfsson and McAfee (2011) and Acemoglu and Autor (2011). This year range is also the norm for this type of scoping study(Zheng and Lee, 2016).These searches identified a total of 1581 articles and conference papers from all disciplines. The titles and abstracts were reviewedfor each source to see whether they should be included. Items were excluded if they were purely technical papers concerned withengineering and design issues related to the technologies examined, or they were not focussed on the application of the selectedtechnologies in the context of knowledge and service work. Duplicate sources were also identified and removed. This filtering processproduced 136 sources for review and coding. Second, a backward search was conducted via the reference lists of these 136 sources.Third, we used Web of Science to perform a forward search to identify sources that cited key articles identified from the initial search.These two steps produced a further 83 sources for inclusion. Thus, the total number of sources identified for review and in-depthcoding was 219.The sources were coded according to the four research questions, plus immediate context,3 level of analysis, and referencediscipline. The main research finding of the paper was used as the primary basis for research question coding. Papers that providedsubstantive findings related to more than one research question were coded to all relevant research questions. After completing thecoding and review, an additional 35 sources were removed from the sample. These sources included working papers, trade pro-fessional or newspaper articles (15 sources), sources that referred to technologies that were not of direct interest to this study, forexample, crowdsourcing and virtual reality (16 sources) or sources whose origin was unclear, not peer-reviewed or only comprised of3 For this study, we only consider the immediate context where the study is conducted, i.e. the organisation, industry or sector. For studies thatwere proof of concept or experiments, we recorded the context for where the Intelligent Automation was intended to be applied, e.g., an MLexperiment to identify genes associated with Alzheimer's disease was classified as the healthcare context.6C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600an abstract (4 sources). The resulting sample of 184 coded journal and conference papers are listed in Appendices A and B.FindingsIn this section, we discuss the findings of our analysis of the literature concerning our four research questions.What Intelligent Automation investments and Non-Intelligent Automation investments have been studied?Research on Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service work tends to present new artefacts or technological solutions thatare designed to improve on human limitations in information processing for completing cognitive or manual tasks. Informationprocessing comprises four stages (a) information acquisition, (b) information analysis, (c) decision making, and (d) action(Parasuraman et al., 2000). Two interconnected streams of research have driven these improvements: advances in AI and devel-opments in mobile robotics.Much of the literature in our sample focused on using AI in the first two information-processing stages (a and b). For example,scholars have developed AI systems to automate clinical report writing (Ye, 2015) and a non-disease-specific AI system for thedevelopment of complex care plans (Bennett and Hauser, 2013). Anomaly intrusion detection systems have been developed toimprove cyber security (Enache et al., 2015) as well as an automated forensic examiner that can be used to sort and identify relevantartefacts of cybercrime (Fahdi, 2013). Broussard (2015) describes the development of intelligence-based software system prototypesfor data sorting and identification of investigative storytelling opportunities for public affairs reporting. These research findings showthat Intelligent Automation can provide new information processing capabilities to organisations, managing large volumes of datathat are overwhelming to humans. They are also capable of adjusting and adapting internal models as new data becomes available toprovide results that are increasingly consistent with past data (Tarafdar et al., 2017).Although less prevalent, scholars have also made progress in developing Intelligent Automation technologies to optimise decision-making and action. For example, scholars have developed new AI-enabled applications to predict the likelihood of outcomes, such asbankruptcy (Chaudhuri and De, 2011), flooding (Sayers et al., 2014), or improving stock market timing and portfolio creation(Hilovská and Koncz, 2012). ML-enabled mobile robots are capable of making sorting decisions and packaging objects (Chen, 2013);navigating a restaurant and picking up plates (Yu et al., 2012) or giving directions in a shopping mall (Brscic et al., 2017). Thesestudies show how some tasks that formerly required human intervention are being automated. However, it was notable in thesestudies that robots were positioned as supporting rather than substituting for the worker. For example, a mobile robot can pick upplates in a restaurant, but a human is still required to clean and reset the table (Yu et al., 2012). Similarly, new mandatory auditingprocedures might be automated, but a human is still needed to check and sign off the audit (Sutton et al., 2016; Kokina andDavenport, 2017). Thus, it is essential to consider Intelligent Automation at the level of tasks, rather than jobs per se when attemptingto predict the implications for technologically driven unemployment/underemployment.The level of Intelligent Automation may also vary for different tasks. For example, fully autonomous mobile robots have beenequipped with environmental sensors to collect environmental data in warehouse environments (Russo et al., 2016), completecleaning tasks in elderly care environments (Nielsen et al., 2016) or adapted to be able to navigate their way around an environmentwithout collisions with objects or other robots (Dewi et al., 2014). In each case, these mobile robots can complete their assigned taskswithout the need for any human supervision. By contrast, Calo et al. (2011) describe the use of the Paro animalistic robot that mimicsthe behaviour of a seal to help with care for elderly dementia patients. Paro responds when people interact with it via talk or touch.Although Paro can react to humans automatically, a health or social care professional is still needed to decide when to give the robotto the patient, the duration of the patient's interaction with the robot, and to supervise the interaction. Thus, while the robot operatesautonomously, a human is necessary for robot deployment and supervision. The humanoid child robot Kaspar illustrates a furtherlevel of automation. Kaspar has been designed for interactions with children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). Wood et al.(2013) report that during interviews, children with ASD found it easier to interact with Kaspar, compared to a human interviewer,because the robot was more predictable and offered fewer complex cues to interpret. Kaspar was operated remotely by a healthcareprofessional using a ‘Wizard of Oz’ style of control, so the robot appeared to behave autonomously. In this example, the robotrequired healthcare workers to operate the robot and also monitor and supervise the interaction between the child and the robot(Bekele et al., 2013; Wood et al., 2013). Therefore, it appears that the level of Intelligent Automation may vary for different tasks,ranging from no automation, the worker does everything, to full automation where the worker is no longer needed (Sheridan andParasuraman, 2005).These studies also indicate that for the successful deployment of Intelligent Automation, human work roles may need to beredesigned or created. Human workers may be required to perform new tasks such as supervising, collaborating, controlling, orrectifying malfunctions in AI applications. These new or re-designed roles may result in role expansion or job deskilling. For example,the implementation of an automated dispensing system enabled the expansion of the pharmacy technicians’ role to ward-baseddispensing and discharge services, but also made the technicians feel like production-line workers rather than skilled dispensers(James et al., 2013). Further, when redesigning the task, developers need to consider whether the work task is solely to perform therequired function (e.g., serving food to a handicapped person) or requires a more holistic perspective that connects to other ‘work’(e.g., that the service employee ‘notices’ that the person with a disability is experiencing acute health problems). A care robot may beable to perform both functions but must be designed to be able to undertake these tasks (Fischer, 2012). Thus, the redesign or creationof Intelligent Automation work tasks should consider two perspectives: the tasks to be processed and the functions the IntelligentAutomation should perform (task-orientated perspective), and whether this is a desirable organisation of work to deliver the required7C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600performance results, for example, in relation to service quality and profitability (organisation of societal work perspective) (Fischer,2012).A small number of studies highlighted some of the related technical skills needed by human workers for the application ofIntelligent Automation. For example, surgeons initially undergo a steep learning curve to perform robot-assisted surgery (Sananèset al., 2011). However, it has been found that once surgeons have experience of using robot surgery and conducting particular typesof operation, they can extend their skills to related surgical procedures relatively easily (Semerjian and Pavlovich, 2017). One studyalso reviewed the role of nurses as part of the robot-assisted surgical team, reporting that these nurses were required to obtain a highlevel of professional knowledge alongside expertise in robotic technology to manage robotic malfunctions (Raheem et al., 2017).These studies highlight the need for human workers to have complementary technical skills for the Intelligent Automation of somework activities.How have Intelligent Automation investments influenced business process performance or organisational performance?The literature reviewed suggests that the application of Intelligent Automation can deliver improvements in business processperformance. Bogue (2011) reports that the use of robots in science labs can reduce labour, provide greater precision, reduce risks tohuman operators, eliminate sample contamination, and complete tasks more quickly compared to human manual processes. Ye(2015) reports on the development of a secretary-mimicking AI system claiming that pathologists can save time via automatingroutine secretarial work. Similar claims have been made for the Intelligent Automation of sales work (Holloway et al., 2013), forensicwork, where AI-enabled data mining technologies can be used to analyse social media (Baggili and Breitinger, 2015), and publicaffairs reporting (Broussard, 2015). These studies suggest that Intelligent Automation can have a positive influence on businessprocess performance.Improvements in business process performance can be achieved either through full automation of processes or augmenting humancapabilities. For example, Robotic Process Automation (RPA) automates routine administrative tasks. It eliminates the need forpeople to undertake routine data entry work, which has widespread business relevance, e.g., validating the sale of insurance pre-miums, generating utility bills, creating news stories, paying healthcare insurance claims, and keeping employee records up to date(Lacity and Willcocks, 2016b). Lacity and Willcocks (2016a) report a case study of the RPA implementation experiences of TelefónicaO2. The company automated 15 processes using 160 RPA robots4 Providing a 600–800% return on investment over three years andreported labour reductions or re-deployments of full-time employees (FTE) in the ‘hundreds’. The duration of some processes weredescribed as being reduced from days to minutes and follow up calls to customers had fallen by 80% compared to previous levels. Inanother case study of Xchanging, a London-based business process and technology services provider, it was reported that the ap-plication of RPA to validate the sale of 500 insurance policies reduced the process from several days to about 30 min (Lacity andWillcocks, 2016b). By 2016, Xchanging had automated 14 processes using 27 RPA robots, saving an average of 30% on each process.In both cases, it was implied that the business process performance improvements had contributed to overall organisational per-formance improvement, but this link was not studied directly. The studies suggest that organisations that are keen to adopt fullIntelligent Automation for work tasks are likely to prioritise internal cost-saving and productivity improvements, thereby followingan efficiency strategy to deliver business value (Melville et al., 2004).Process performance improvements have also been reported when Intelligent Automation and human capabilities have beencombined to perform complex tasks such as robot-assisted surgery. The use of a surgical robot enables the human surgeon to completesurgical operation procedures to higher levels of precision using less invasive methods than would have been possible without therobot's assistance leading to better patient recovery times. For example, when compared to open surgery, robot-assisted radicalcystectomy combined with an enhanced recovery process reduced surgical morbidity and length of stay (Collins et al., 2016). Si-milarly, a study of robotic colorectal surgery found that a length of bowel around the tumour could be removed more safely withreduced blood loss (Zaghloul and Mahmoud, 2016). A study reporting the development of autonomous robot-assisted mastoidectomy(a surgical procedure that removes diseased mastoid air cells located in the skull) found that 96% of the targeted bone could beremoved without damage to critical structures (Danilchenko et al., 2011). These studies of Intelligent Automation suggest thatorganisations that augment human capabilities, rather than fully automate tasks, thereby prioritising service quality improvements,are more likely to adopt an effectiveness strategy to deliver business value (Melville et al., 2004).Many of the performance improvements reported in the literature are achieved by combining the technical capabilities ofIntelligent Automation with the social skills of human workers in hybrid worker teams (Schwartz et al., 2016). Thus, where thehuman worker continues to contribute to the work task, the performance of the human, as well as the Intelligent Automationtechnology, may influence business process performance. Several studies have explored the role of humans working alongside au-tomated business processes and the impact on the performance of the human and report mixed results. For example, in the transportsector, Balfe et al. (2015) report on an experiment to compare increasing levels of Intelligent Automation in rail signalling. Theyfound that human rail signalling performance was most consistent during the highest level of automation and that human operatorsperceived their workload to have reduced. Reporting on an air traffic control experiment and trial, van de Merwe et al. (2012) foundthat automation enabled air traffic controllers to achieve more accurate air traffic delivery. They also found that some air trafficcontrollers reported reduced levels of physical workload but no reduction of mental workload. By contrast, Dang and Tapus (2015)4 An RPA ‘robot’ is a software solution and not a physical robot. An RPA robot is the equivalent of one software license (Lacity and Willcocks,2016a).8C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600report on an experiment into young people’s attitudes towards the use of robot assistants and the extent to which this affectedpeople's performance and stress levels. While they found that people preferred working with robotic support, the use of roboticassistance did not improve their performance. Kraan et al.'s (2014) secondary analysis of European survey data suggests that acombination of technological pacing of tasks and lack of autonomy of workers can increase stress levels.Further, Nomura et al.'s (2011) experimental study found that human anxiety levels increased when robots behaved in specificways for those who had pre-existing high levels of anxiety and Gombolay et al. (2015) found that when people work with robots, theyallocate more work to themselves than their robot co-worker. These studies provide evidence to show that worker performance mayimprove or deteriorate when working with Intelligent Automation. Scholars recommend that Intelligent Automation needs to bedesigned to prevent the creation of additional work for the human worker, such as data entry or the monitoring of the robot’s work, ifreductions in human worker performance is to be avoided (Dang and Tapus, 2015; Gombolay et al., 2015).How have contextual factors influenced Intelligent Automation enabled business process performance or organisational performance?The literature suggested several factors could influence whether investments in Intelligent Automation for knowledge and servicework processes could deliver business value in organisational, industry and societal contexts.In organisational contexts, human worker’s trust in Intelligent Automation was identified by several scholars as necessary forworkplace acceptance (Davenport et al., 2012; Gilbert et al., 2015; Nielsen et al., 2016). For example, trust in the decisions made byIntelligent Automation was reported as necessary for air traffic controllers' willingness to accept increased levels of automation in twohypothetical scenarios (Bekier et al., 2011). Trust in Intelligent Automation technologies was particularly crucial for situations ofconflict between the human worker and Intelligent Automation. If conflict occurs, for example in deciding which action to pursue,degradation of business process performance may result due to the human concentrating on resolving the conflict, rather thanconsidering alternative forms of action (Dehais et al., 2012). In an experiment where French military staff used a robot to identify atarget, when the human operator encountered a conflict with the robot, (for example, the robot reporting it was low on battery andneeded to return to base during the critical targeting part of the operation), the human operator would overrule the robot and preventit returning to base. The human operator remained focused on completing the task and ignored the low battery warning messages(Dehais et al., 2012). Understanding the mechanisms of such ‘conflicts’ are important to inform protocols to determine the level ofautonomy that should be assigned to the Intelligent Automation, and the level of control that should be retained by the humanworker. These protocols would be essential for safety-critical situations but also business process performance in organisations. Forexample, an insurance company implementing automated claims assessment needs to be confident that the error rate for identifyingfraudulent claims is sufficiently low, in order to minimise the risk of losses and reputational damage from incorrect automateddecisions.In industry contexts, highly regulated sectors such as healthcare may encounter challenges in the uptake and application ofIntelligent Automation. For example, there may be privacy and security concerns regarding the integration of health related big datafrom individuals’ wearable devices and sensors (Balram et al., 2016). The financial costs of robot-assisted surgery remain high, andthere is a shortage of suitably trained healthcare professionals (Sananès et al., 2011) which may prevent some healthcare organi-sations from investing in these areas. Technical errors are also more unacceptable in health contexts with the result that technologyvendors have avoided developing software systems that enact medical diagnoses or treatment recommendations because of fears oflegal liability (Dilsizian and Siegel, 2014). However, in other sectors, these factors may not have the same level of significance. Forexample, technical errors may be more tolerable in lower-risk environments such as education or finance. However, at present, theliterature does not provide a comprehensive picture of different sector requirements.In societal contexts, the literature discusses the ethical and moral aspects of Intelligent Automation applications and responsibleand accountable decision-making. For example, the development of ‘caring’ machines designed to read emotions and behaviouralsignals, may mean the boundaries between humans and machines become less visible and lead to ‘Turing Deceptions’ (i.e. theinability of a human to determine whether or not s(he) is interacting with a machine). This confusion could present a significantethical issue, especially in situations involving vulnerable people (such as children, or clinical patients) which may limit the ap-plication of these technologies (Bryson, 2016). There may also be situations where the Intelligent Automation is more ‘ethical’ thanhumans because it is not swayed by emotions (Kinne and Stojanov, 2014) or prejudices. It has been argued that one way to achieve‘healthy’ machine-user interactions may be through the development of Intelligent Automation technologies that are transparent interms of their decision-making processes (Bostrom and Yudkowsky, 2011; Bryson, 2016; Kinne and Stojanov, 2014).Further, when large numbers of people have been involved in the design and use of Intelligent Automation technologies, it maynot be obvious where responsibility for Intelligent Automation and its actions lie. Scientists and practitioners have argued vigorouslyabout who should take responsibility for the (potential) negative consequences of Intelligent Automation technologies (Johnson,2014). One point upon which most scholars agree is that the ultimate responsibility should lie with the human stakeholders, i.e.,machine designers, manufacturers, implementers, and users (Bryson and Winfield, 2017). Social attitudes to these ethical and moralissues are likely to be manifested through government policies and regulations that may promote or limit the use of IntelligentAutomation technologies in different national contexts. Organisations will need to be sensitive to these societal issues to ensure thatapplying Intelligent Automation to knowledge and service work is not at the expense of demonstrating high levels of corporate socialresponsibility.9C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Fig. 2. A Business Value Model of Intelligent Automation for Knowledge and Service Work.How have lag effects influenced Intelligent Automation enabled business process performance or organisational performance?A small number of studies considered the speed of advances in Intelligent Automation technologies in general terms, with severalscholars observing the exponential increase in the rate of technological innovations being translated to widespread practical use (e.g.,Autor, 2015; Makridakis, 2017). For example, Danilchenko et al. (2011) observe that it took 10–15 years for robot-assisted surgery tomove from the design and development lab to the operating theatre. This lag was due to the time it took to overcome challenges thathad to be resolved, such as maintenance of sterility, logistics regarding transportation and set-up of the robot, and safety constraints.It has been suggested that AI will perform 30% of corporate audits by 2025 (Kokina and Davenport, 2017) and Frey and Osborne(2017) indicate that jobs most at risk of Intelligent Automation could be lost within the next decade. These studies suggest that theremay be a lag of between eight to ten years before Intelligent Automation starts to change knowledge and service work jobs sig-nificantly.A further dimension to lag effects is the length of time it takes for the initial investment in Intelligent Automation to be translatedinto improvements in business value. This lag may be dependent on the technical infrastructure and complementary workforce skillsneeded to exploit the technology. For example, RPA operates on existing technology platforms and does not require developers tohave special abilities for it to be deployed (Lacity and Willcocks, 2016b). By contrast, robot-assisted surgery requires dedicatedoperating theatres to be created and specialist training of clinicians (Sananès et al., 2011). Thus, the lag between initial investmentand business value returns may be longer for applications of Intelligent Automation that have more complex resource requirements.In general, research in this area is limited, with significant gaps in knowledge, and few studies being conducted on these topics.Critical review of the literature and future research agendaWe mapped the knowledge areas the reviewed literature covers and the ones that still deserve more investigation in Fig. 2. In thismodel, we put forth a business value-based perspective of Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service work. In the followingparagraphs, we critically evaluate the literature related to our four research questions and highlight critical gaps in knowledge. Wedevelop an agenda of broad research questions that build from the identified gaps. How the research agenda is linked to the four coreresearch questions, and gaps identified, is summarised in Table 3, and described below.Our first research question investigated the Intelligent Automation investments and complementary non-Intelligent Automationinvestments that have been studied in the literature. Research findings reveal that recent advances in Intelligent Automation tech-nologies have enabled new capabilities in managing and deriving insights from big data (Tarafdar et al., 2017). These new cap-abilities are mainly situated at the job task level, and the level of Intelligent Automation may vary for different tasks (e.g., Russoet al., 2016; Wood et al., 2013; Calo et al., 2011). Organisations need to consider the precise functionality that is required to completethe task, ideally through combining task-orientated and organisation of work perspectives (Fischer, 2012) to ensure desired outcomesare achieved from the application of Intelligent Automation. In some situations, tasks may be fully automated and require no humanintervention (e.g. Nielsen et al., 2016). However, in many cases, Intelligent Automation involves some level of human workercontribution (e.g., Bekele et al., 2013; Wood et al., 2013). This involvement is likely to mean that the job tasks and roles are likely tochange, the human worker no longer being solely responsible for the completion of the work task but working in collaboration with10C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Table 3Research questions, gaps, and agenda for intelligent automation research.Research questionsGaps in literatureFuture research agendaWhat Intelligent Automation and non-IntelligentAutomation investments have been studied?GAP 1: Range and type of tasks targetedfor Intelligent AutomationGAP 2: Level of Intelligent AutomationimplementedGAP 3: Impact of Intelligent Automationon jobs/workGAP 4: Impact of Intelligent Automationon worker’s skillsGAP 5: Workers attitudes and behavioursin response to the implementation ofIntelligent AutomationHow have Intelligent Automation investmentsinfluenced business process performance ororganisational performance?GAP 6: Linkage of Intelligent Automationto organisational strategyHow have contextual factors influenced IntelligentAutomation-enabled business processperformance or organisational performance?GAP 7: Impact of Intelligent Automationon worker performanceGAP 8: Impact of Intelligent Automationon organisational performanceGAP 9: Influence of contextual factors onIntelligent Automation decision-makingGAP 10: Role of contextual factors ondesign and implementation of IntelligentAutomationGAP 11: Stakeholders responsible forconsequences of Intelligent AutomationuseHow have lag effects influenced IntelligentAutomation-enabled business processperformance or organisational performance?GAP 12: Length of time betweeninvestment in Intelligent Automation, andpositive return on investment11• How do organisations determine which tasks areappropriate for Intelligent Automation, and whatfactors shape this decision-making process?• How can socially acceptable values be designed intoIntelligent Automation to enable ethical decision-making, and how should this be tested?• How do organisations determine an appropriate levelof Intelligent Automation for tasks, what factors shapethis decision-making process, and how does micro-level variation of Intelligent Automation within tasksinfluence task performance?• How do new configurations of human-IntelligentAutomation interactions emerge, and what are theirimpacts on working and organising?new ways of working in organisations?• What are the positive/negative consequences of these• How can organisations ensure Intelligent Automation is• How are new forms of expertise, skill requirements,an enabler of meaningful work?and training emerging to meet the demands of usingIntelligent Automation?or enhancement of human worker skills over time?• Does the use of Intelligent Automation cause degradation• How do new configurations of human-IntelligentAutomation interactions influence attitudes andactions towards Intelligent Automation?aspects of human-Intelligent Automation collaboration?• What are the psychological, emotional, and social• What are the design implications for IntelligentAutomation technologies for effective human-IntelligentAutomation collaboration in the workplace?• How do organisations make strategic decisionsregarding Intelligent Automation, why do they makethese decisions, and what are the consequences ofthese decisions over time?• How and why do new configurations of human-Intelligent Automation interactions influence humanworker performance?Automation impact on organisational performance?• How and why do investments in Intelligent• How do organisations in different contexts devisepolicies and procedures for combining humanjudgement with Intelligent Automation decision-making?• How do organisations decide where the balance ofcontrol lies in situations of human-IntelligentAutomation conflict, and how do contextual factorsinfluence this decision?• How do organisations decide whether the human shouldbe retained in the decision-making loop, and how docontextual factors influence this decision?• How do contextual factors such as organisation size,industry type, or regulatory context shape the wayIntelligent Automation technologies are developed andimplemented?• How do organisations decide who is responsible for theconsequences of Intelligent Automation investments,and why?system?• What constitutes a responsible Intelligent Automation• How can an organisation identify bias in emerging• What is the return on investment from investments indecision-making capabilities of Intelligent Automation?Intelligent Automation, how should such returns bemeasured, and over what timescale should suchinvestments be evaluated?C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600the Intelligent Automation to complete the work task. These new work roles may require workers to learn new technical andprofessional skills (e.g., Raheem et al., 2017).As indicated, the literature contains several significant gaps, which point towards a future research agenda. First, it provideslimited guidance regarding how organisations determine which jobs or tasks are appropriate for Intelligent Automation and thefactors that shape this decision-making process (GAP 1). The literature indicates that Intelligent Automation can be applied to theinformation processing stages required for a range of knowledge and service work tasks. For example, Intelligent Automation can beused for information acquisition, information analysis, decision-making or action implementation (e.g., Bennett and Hauser, 2013;Chaudhuri and De, 2011; Fahdi, 2013; Kokina and Davenport, 2017). However, much of the literature has focused on developingIntelligent Automation systems for individual information processing stages, under laboratory conditions (e.g., Enache et al., 2015;Ye, 2015). Thus, while this literature confirms that such functionality is possible (proof of principle), future research is required toexamine how organisations select the jobs or tasks for Intelligent Automation and implement these new technical capabilities (designapplication). Further, it will be crucial that socially acceptable values and norms are designed into the decision-making capabilities ofnew applications of Intelligent Automation. Thus, research is needed to investigate how engineers, management, and society considerand incorporate social values into new Intelligent Automation applications and the associated dynamic test protocols necessary toverify whether the Intelligent Automation continues to make ethically acceptable decisions over time.Second, there are significant limitations in our understanding of how organisations decide the level of Intelligent Automation thatis implemented (GAP 2). The literature shows that the level of Intelligent Automation applied for each information processing stage ofa task may vary (Russo et al., 2016; Wood et al., 2013; Calo et al., 2011). How is the level decided on? A single task may also bringtogether high, medium and low levels of Intelligent Automation. For example, high levels of Intelligent Automation for informationacquisition and analysis, medium levels of Intelligent Automation for decision-making and low levels of Intelligent Automation foraction implementation (Balfe et al., 2015). Consequently, organisations and researchers must consider this potential micro-levelvariation of Intelligent Automation within tasks. Merely describing a task along one continuum (e.g., having high, medium or lowIntelligent Automation) does not give an appreciation of the different levels of automation that may be present within tasks andwould not allow an analysis of the impact of automation at various stages of decision-making (Balfe et al., 2015). It would be valuableto investigate how organisations determine an appropriate level of Intelligent Automation for tasks, the factors that shape thesedecisions, and how micro-level variation of Intelligent Automation within tasks may influence task performance. It would also beessential to explore the positive and negative consequences of these new ways of working in organisations, such as whether theyincrease or reduce the level of meaningful work undertaken by human workers.Third, there are several gaps concerning how workers are affected by and respond to Intelligent Automation. We know little abouthow human work tasks are redesigned to accommodate Intelligent Automation (GAP 3), how the skill requirements of jobs changebecause of this (GAP 4), and how human workers respond to new and redesigned job changes (GAP 5). Implementing IntelligentAutomation in organisations is likely to involve significant changes to existing jobs and the creation of new posts from new con-figurations of human-Intelligent Automation interactions. Human workers may find their job roles expanded or deskilled (Jameset al., 2013). Further, the implementation of Intelligent Automation requires organisations to consider all possible elements of theselected task to ensure a holistic view of the work activity is captured to reduce the risk of Intelligent Automation deliveringundesirable work outcomes (Fischer, 2012). For example, does the use of Intelligent Automation over time cause degradation orenhancement of human worker skills? This gap calls for further research that investigates how new configurations of human-In-telligent Automation interactions emerge and what their impacts are on working and organising.Further research is also needed to investigate the new skills that workers need to develop to perform these jobs. The literatureindicates that human workers may require new skills in supervising Intelligent Automation, collaborating with IntelligentAutomation, controlling Intelligent Automation, or rectifying Intelligent Automation malfunctions (e.g., Raheem et al., 2017; Sananèset al., 2011; Semerjian and Pavlovich, 2017). Thus, it would be valuable to have further research that examines how new require-ments for expertise, skill, and training emerge to meet the demands of using Intelligent Automation. Finally, further research isnecessary to explore workers’ attitudes and behaviours in response to the implementation of Intelligent Automation. The literature onhuman-robot dynamics in hybrid teams (e.g., Gombolay et al., 2015; Schwartz et al., 2016) highlights the importance of the interfacebetween workers and robots. The more human-like these systems become, the more significant the implications for psychological,emotional and social impacts from human-Intelligent Automation interactions. Future research needs to examine the nature of thisdynamic to understand how Intelligent Automation technologies should be designed in terms of physical form and function and hownew configurations of human-Intelligent Automation interactions influence attitudes and behaviours toward Intelligent Automation.It is encouraging to note that IS researchers are beginning to address this critical research challenge (e.g., You and Robert, 2018).The second research question examined how Intelligent Automation has influenced the business process or organisational per-formance. The literature provides evidence to suggest that applications of Intelligent Automation can deliver improvements inbusiness process performance, although the impact on overall organisational performance is less clear. Organisations can adoptdifferent levels of automation to provide performance improvements from efficiency gains, such as using RPA to remove the need fora human worker to perform a routine or mundane task (Lacity and Willcocks, 2016a, 2016b). Alternatively, organisations can employautomation for effectiveness gains by enabling work tasks to be completed to a higher level of performance than could be achieved bythe human worker, such as a surgeon using robot-assisted surgery to perform a medical procedure (Collins et al., 2016; Zaghloul andMahmoud, 2016), or providing a new capability, such as mining big social media data (Baggili and Breitinger, 2015). In many studies,Intelligent Automation is used to augment existing human capabilities rather than substitute the human (Schwartz et al., 2016). Inthese situations, the human is a vital contributor to the successful completion of work tasks. Studies reveal that when collaboratingwith Intelligent Automation, worker performance may vary, improving in some situations and declining in others (Balfe et al., 2015;12C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Gombolay et al., 2015; van de Merwe et al., 2012).However, several significant gaps in the literature remain. First is the link between business strategy and Intelligent Automationinvestment. Intelligent automation can enable organisations to follow a range of strategies to deliver business value. For example,organisations could use Intelligent Automation for efficiency or productivity-enhancement strategies, supporting changes/im-provements in service quality, innovation-enhancement policy, or strategy linked to the provision of new products or services(Melville et al., 2004). However, it is unclear which strategies organisations find most beneficial for delivering business value fromIntelligent Automation (GAP 6). Davenport and Kirby (2016b) argue that organisations should focus on an augmentation path torealise business value from Intelligent Automation. McAfee and Brynjolfsson, (2017) agree that this business value strategy is likely tobe evident in the short term, but argue that over longer time, as advances in Intelligent Automation continue, organisations will shiftfrom an augmentation strategy to a full Intelligent Automation strategy. This debate highlights the need for further research to gatherempirical evidence about organisations’ actual strategic decisions regarding Intelligent Automation, how and why organisationsmake these decisions and their consequences over time (Markus, 2017).Second, there is limited evidence regarding how the implementation of Intelligent Automation may impact on human workerperformance (GAP 7). A small number of studies indicate that some humans are happy to collaborate and work with robots(Gombolay et al., 2015) whereas others experience high levels of anxiety (Nomura et al., 2011) degrading human performance (Dangand Tapus, 2015). However, the majority of technically focused studies lack human involvement, which presents a significantlimitation on their findings. Further, there were no studies in our sample that discussed the effects of Intelligent Automation onorganisational performance such as changes in stock market value, productivity, profitability or competitive advantage. While theconnection between business process improvements and organisational performance has been established for traditional technologies(Schryen, 2013), it not clear whether the relationship is the same for Intelligent Automation (GAP 8). This gap calls for furtherresearch that investigates how and why new configurations of human-Intelligent Automation interactions may influence humanworker performance, and how and why investments in Intelligent Automation may impact on organisational performance.The third research question examined the contextual factors that may influence Intelligent Automation enabled business processperformance or organisational performance. The review revealed a range of factors might influence the uptake and application ofIntelligent Automation in organisational, industry and societal contexts. For example, the relative importance of mediating factorssuch as trust, for the acceptance of Intelligent Automation, varied by organisational context (Davenport et al., 2012; Gilbert et al.,2015; Nielsen et al., 2016). Also, the significance of the consequences of human-Intelligent Automation decision-making conflicts islikely to change in different settings (Dehais et al., 2012). Many of these factors, such as trust in technology, are not new and havebeen associated with traditional IT. However, the significance of these factors is magnified for applications of Intelligent Automationbecause of the potential shift in decision-making control, from the human to the technology. This transformation presents three newresearch gaps.First, there is limited research that examines how organisations design governance arrangements and structures associated withIntelligent Automation decision-making in different contexts (GAP 9). In safety-critical environments, such as air traffic control,stakeholders are more cautious in the level of autonomy they give to the Intelligent Automation system (Bekier et al., 2011).However, researchers have not yet investigated whether stakeholders follow the same degree of caution in business and managementenvironments. Similarly, for service delivery for vulnerable people, decision-making may be particularly important. To ensure theinterests of these people can be protected, clear lines of governance are recommended for automated decision making with humanstakeholders taking responsibility and being accountable for the decisions made on their behalf by Intelligent Automation (Bryson,2016). However, further research is needed in different contexts to understand how organisations devise suitable policies and pro-cedures for combining human judgement and Intelligent Automation for decision-making. Also, studies that investigate how orga-nisations decide where the balance of control lies in situations of human-Intelligent Automation conflict, whether the human shouldbe retained in the decision-making loop, and how contextual factors may influence these decision-making processes, would bevaluable.Second, given that the benefit-risk calculus is likely to vary by Intelligent Automation technology and situation (Markus, 2017) itwas notable that the literature had not examined many common organisation-related factors such as size, infrastructure, training, orindustry factors such as regulatory constraints or intensity of competition and their influence on Intelligent Automation (GAP 10).The gap in knowledge in this topic is extensive, with little work in this area. Thus, further research is needed to investigate howcontextual factors (such as industry type, government policy, or organisation size) may shape the ways that Intelligent Automationtechnologies are developed and implemented.Third, although the literature points to the role of human stakeholders in taking ultimate responsibility (Bryson and Winfield,2017), there is a broad group of different stakeholders operating in multiple organisations so it is unclear how accountability wouldbe realised in practice (GAP 11). Knowledge is limited regarding how organisations manage the legal liability associated withIntelligent Automation applications. There appears to be agreement in the literature that it will be the human stakeholders that aremost likely to be held accountable and responsible for AI decision-making. What impact does this have for innovation and appli-cations of these technologies? As has been discussed, machine designers, manufacturers, implementers, and users may all be po-tentially liable for damages (e.g., Johnson, 2014). Many technology firms already stress that their products are designed to supportdecisions, but the choice of whether to follow any recommendations made by the AI system is ultimately the responsibility of thehuman operator (e.g., IBM, 2017; Ross and Swetlitz, 2017). This gap calls for future research that investigates how organisationsdecide who is responsible for the consequences of Intelligent Automation investments, why and what impacts this has on techno-logical developments. Also, research that explores the characteristics that constitute 'responsible' Intelligent Automation systemswould be valuable, as well as methods for organisations to identify bias in the emerging decision-making capabilities of Intelligent13C. Coombs, et al.Automation.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600The fourth research question addressed the influence of lag effects on Intelligent Automation enabled business process perfor-mance or organisational performance. Research findings suggest that lag effects will vary by technology, process and context, and interms of investment for business value return (e.g., Lacity and Willcocks, 2016b; Sananès et al., 2011). The findings indicate that weare still a decade away from Intelligent Automation having wide-scale impacts on organisations and levels of employment, althoughthe expectation is that these impacts will be dramatic (Frey and Osborne, 2017; Kokina and Davenport, 2017). When lag effects werediscussed, they tended to be considered at a high level with general statements about the increasing speed of technological in-novation, and past experiences of previous technological innovations (e.g., Autor, 2015). It appears too early for research to provide aclear and nuanced picture of how lag effects may occur for Intelligent Automation. This limitation is compounded by the lack ofempirical studies of Intelligent Automation implementations. Thus, there is little guidance on how long organisations may have towait before they see a return on their Intelligent Automation investments (GAP 12), nor on the level of value returned. As with thegap in knowledge concerning contextual factors, the lack of research in this topic is significant. Thus, further studies are needed toinvestigate the extent to which investments in Intelligent Automation provide a return on investment, how such returns should bemeasured, and the timescale over which such investments should be evaluated.To investigate the research gaps highlighted above, we propose three broad recommendations for research design. First, werecommend that future empirical research should be guided by theories that reflect the complex and dynamic impacts of IntelligentAutomation, such as complex adaptive system theory (e.g., Marjanovic and Cecez-Kecmanovic, 2017). Second, given the complexnature of the topic, we recommend a mixed-method approach, combining qualitative and quantitative research designs (e.g., ex-periments, real-time measurements, observations, stakeholder surveys, focus groups, ethnographic case studies). For example, alongitudinal, mixed-methods, case study-based approach could capture data on how the attitudes and trust levels of different sta-keholders (e.g., managers, IT staff, users) dynamically evolve during the implementation and use of Intelligent Automation withinorganisations. Third, Intelligent Automation of knowledge and service work is multifaceted and associated with a variety of academicdisciplines. Hence, it can be best studied through the adoption of a multi-disciplinary approach (Markus, 2017). For example, ISresearchers could work with computer scientists and philosophers to inform the ethical design of transparent Intelligent Automationdecision-making processes and the factors that influence their organisational adoption and acceptance.Concluding remarksThe Intelligent Automation of knowledge and service work is likely to be a highly significant global economic development, andthis paper provides a foundation to advance IS research by synthesising existing literature, identifying research gaps and presentingan agenda for future research. Based on a comprehensive multi-disciplinary literature review and analysis guided by IS business valuetheory, we make three significant contributions to knowledge. First, we present a new conceptualisation and definition of IntelligentAutomation. Second, we provide a business value-based model of Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service work and identifytwelve research gaps that hinder a complete understanding of the business value realisation process. Third, we provide a researchagenda to address these gaps and further our understanding of the strategic impacts of Intelligent Automation for knowledge andservice work.Funding acknowledgement and disclaimerThis study was funded by the Chartered Institute of Professional Development (CIPD). The views expressed are those of theauthors and not necessarily those of the CIPD.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Professor Jarvenpaa and the review team for all the constructive comments and suggestions that weremost helpful in revising the paper and in offering a stronger contribution. We would also like to thank Professor Guy Fitzgerald for hisconstructive comments on earlier versions of the paper.14C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOtropsnarTeraClaicoSdnaerachtlaeHnoitacudEcni(ssenisuBlareneGlanoitazinagro-arpuSlanoitazinagrO)ylredlegnidulcni(,selaS,RH,ecnaniF)gnitekraM)lateicos(ecitcarpkroWecnerefnoCdeweiver-reePsgnideecorPlanruoJrohtuAtxetnocetaidemmIsisylanafoleveLecruoS.txetnocetaidemmidnasisylanafoslevel,secruos:selcitradedoC1AelbaT––––––*––**–**––––––––**–*––––)egaptxennodeunitnoc(*–**––***–––**–**–***–––*––––––––*––––––––––––––**–*–––*––*–**–*––*–––*––**–*––––––*––**–––*–––**––––*––*–*––*–***––*––*–***********************************)7102,.latemeehaRledbA()6102,.lateinashedazilA()5102,uicnatSdnaublA()1102,.lateihsremA()4102,esorbmA()1102,nosledA()7102,.latetirmA()6102,haysnaidrA()1102,.latenorA()4102,nafiarhsA()5102,nafiarhsA()5102,rotuA()5102,regnitierBdnailiggaB()2102,auraBdnaauraB()3102,.lateelekeB()1102,.latereikeB()3102,resuaHdnattenneB()1102,.lateniklaB()6102,.latemarlaB()5102,.lateeflaB()4102,.lateliraB()7102,.latenosnalB()3102,.lateiccoB()2102,.latelaliB()1102,eugoB()4102,lebiB()1102,ykswokduYdnamortsoB()5102,dalblliGdnanamoB()7102,.latecicsrB()5102,drassuorB()3102,drahkruB()6102,nosyrB()1102,nyuBdnanuyB()7102,.lateorienraC()1102,.lateolaC(15AxidneppAC. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOtropsnarTeraClaicoSdnaerachtlaeHnoitacudEcni(ssenisuBlareneGlanoitazinagro-arpuSlanoitazinagrO)ylredlegnidulcni(,selaS,RH,ecnaniF)gnitekraM)lateicos(ecitcarpkroWecnerefnoCdeweiver-reePsgnideecorPlanruoJrohtuAtxetnocetaidemmIsisylanafoleveLecruoS)deunitnoc(1AelbaT*––*–**–*–––**–*––*–––––––*–––)egaptxennodeunitnoc(***––**–**–––*–**–––***–––––––*–––***––––*––*–**––––––––*–––******–––***–*––––***––*–*****–*––*****–*––––***–*–*–********–**–*–********************************************)4102,.latenamhciF-tahcrahC()5102,.latesuobmalarahC()1102,eDdnairuhduahC()6102,.lateetnaclavaC()2102,gnahC()5102,wokinzeleZdnadarnoC()2102,.lateníraM-zaPaled()7102,.latesitcideneBeD()5102,supaTdnagnaD()2102,.latetropnevaD()7102,.lateninorC()3102,.lateinabihC()6102,.latesnilloC()1102,neneoC()7102,haillehC()3102,nehC()7102,.latenóeLed()7102,.laterekceD()2102,.latesiaheD()6102,oinaCeD()2102,.lateoniPleD()4102,.lateiweD(16)2102,ülkürüÇdnacivoknrCgidoD()4102,legeiSdnanaizisliD()5102,naciriD()2102,uodinnaoIdnasagirD()3102,.lateuD()3102,inajnaRdnajariaruD()6102,zerimaRdnasdrawdE()5102,wahsnraEdnallecxE()5102,.lateehcanE()6102,.latenagoD()4102,.latebayroD()7102,werD()6102,zciwecnilKdnaknarF()7102,enrobsOdnayerF()5102,ćirdnaJdnaedurF()5102,.laterendleoG()5102,.latetrebliG()2102,rehcsiF()3102,idhaF(C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOtropsnarTeraClaicoSdnaerachtlaeHnoitacudEcni(ssenisuBlareneGlanoitazinagro-arpuSlanoitazinagrO)ylredlegnidulcni(,selaS,RH,ecnaniF)gnitekraM)lateicos(ecitcarpkroWecnerefnoCdeweiver-reePsgnideecorPlanruoJrohtuAtxetnocetaidemmIsisylanafoleveLecruoS)deunitnoc(1AelbaT––*–*––**–***–**––*–––––)egaptxennodeunitnoc(––**–**––*––*****––––*––**–––***––*–**–***–****––––**–*–––**–––**–***–––––**–*––***–––***–*l*––––**––*****––*****–––*****–*****************************************)7102,yalbmerTdnatemaH()5102,.lateyalobmoG()2102,.lateneaH()2102,zcnoKdnaáksvoliH()1102,ésoRdnayelwoH()3102,.lateyawolloH()6102,.latenenjiuH()7102,hcsriH()6102,.latereltsgneH()1102,.latenosnaH()4102,.lateeH()3102,.latesemaJ()4102,sidailI()5102,mKidnagnaJ()5102,izzutnaSdnaekseJ()4102,.lategnoeJ()7102,.lateojenuJ()7102,.lategnuJ()4102,nosnhoJ()5102,.la)7102,.lateteajo-oviaK(ajo-oviaK()3102,.latealsohK()5102,.latemK(i)3102,eliK()4102,vonajotSdnaenniK()6102,.latekuhsniK()2102,.lategnotnilK()7102,.lateoK()7102,tropnevaDdnaanikoK()7102,.latedursnrøjbloK()3102,resuahueNdnasperK()7102,.lateikslawoK()4102,.latenaarK()a6102,skcoclliWdnayticaL()b6102,skcoclliWdnayticaL()7102,.lateramuK()5102,.lateoduK()7102,.lategnasT()7102,.lateeeL()1102,niwtiL()5102,ioL(17C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOtropsnarTeraClaicoSdnaerachtlaeHnoitacudEcni(ssenisuBlareneGlanoitazinagro-arpuSlanoitazinagrO)ylredlegnidulcni(,selaS,RH,ecnaniF)gnitekraM)lateicos(ecitcarpkroWecnerefnoCdeweiver-reePsgnideecorPlanruoJrohtuAtxetnocetaidemmIsisylanafoleveLecruoS)deunitnoc(1AelbaT*–*****––*––*–**––*––––)egaptxennodeunitnoc(*****–**––**–––*******––*–*–––***–***––*–––*–****–––*––*–––––*–––*–––******–––***––*–––––*––––––*********–––**––***–*–––*––––*––*****************************************)3102,sallisaCdnazepóL-zenítraM()7102,.latesoretsellaB-zenítraM()7102,.latesacaM()4102,.laterojaM()4102,notxuL()1102,dnuL()2102,.latesrehtaM()1102,.latereganeM()6102,.laterelzteM()1102,redleflehciM()1102,hgehgahoM()5102,.laterykoM()4102,sgnirKdnazinoM()7102,.latesirroM()4102,.latenibuM()1102,.lateoknehclinaD()4102,edihBdnakiaN()6102,.latenesleiN()6102,.lateuiN()1102,.latearumoN()5102,dahzeN()7102,.lateilocciP()6102,.lateañeP()6102,trawkniP()1102,sreteiP()6102,nosslhO()1102,rooN()6102,.latenaneeuQ()6102,.latetrehciR()5102,.latellessuR()6102,.lateossuR()6102,inamaS()6102,seveeR()7102,hcivolvaPdnanaijremeS()5102,namhaRdnarairhahS()8102,.lateardneS()6102,nadirehS()4102,.lateuokaramaS()1102,.latesènanaS()4102,.latesreyaS()6102,.lateztrawhcS(18C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOtropsnarTeraClaicoSdnaerachtlaeHnoitacudEcni(ssenisuBlareneGlanoitazinagro-arpuSlanoitazinagrO)ylredlegnidulcni(,selaS,RH,ecnaniF)gnitekraM)lateicos(ecitcarpkroWecnerefnoCdeweiver-reePsgnideecorPlanruoJrohtuAtxetnocetaidemmIsisylanafoleveLecruoS)deunitnoc(1AelbaT––*––*–––**––*–*––*–––––––**––*****–*–––––––**––––**–––*–**–*––*––*––**––––*––**––*–––*–*––*–*––*–*–*––*–*–*–**************************)5102,attiNdnanajararadnuS()4102,ikswomilukS()5102,.latesidilatS()1102,rolyaTdnaamlazS()4102,rettoCdnarolyaT()6102,.latenottuS()5102,.latešepeT()5102,sarroT()2102,.lateewreMednav()7102,.latenrooDnav()6102,gietettarBdnaenreV()4102,.lateremlloV()3102,.lategnaW()5102,.latereyeW()3102,.latedooW()6102,gnirbloW()3102,.la)4102,.lateteuX(uX(.nwonkton/defiicepston-:etoN)6102,duomhaMdnaluolhgaZ()4102,.lateiksńaizuiZ()6102,.lategnehZ()3102,.latekeruZ()7102,.lategnaY()2102,.lateuY()5102,eY()3102,xoFdnayikslopmaY(19C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOlaruoivaheBsecneicS,yrtsitneD,enicideMdeillAdnagnisruNsmetsySnoitamrofnItnemeganaMdnahtlaeH**)egaptxennodeunitnoc(************ *********************)6102,.lateinashedazilA()5102,uicnatSdnaublA()1102,.lateihsremA()4102,esorbmA(,.latemeehaRledbA()1102,nosledA()7102)7102,.latetirmA()6102,haysnaidrA()1102,.latenorA()4102,nafiarhsA(,regnitierBdnailiggaB()5102,rotuA(20)2102,auraBdnaauraB()3102,.lateelekeB()1102,.latereikeB()3102,resuaHdnattenneB()1102,.lateniklaB()6102,.latemarlaB()5102,.lateeflaB()4102,.lateliraB()5102)7102,.latenosnalB()3102,.lateiccoB()2102,.latelaliB(,dalblliGdnanamoB()1102,eugoB()4102,lebiB()5102,ykswokduYdnamortsoB()7102,.latecicsrB()5102,drassuorB()3102,drahkruB()6102,nosyrB()1102)1102,nyuBdnanuyB()7102,.lateorienraC()1102,.lateolaC(,ecnaniF,scimonocEdnassenisuByrtsudnIretupmoCecneicSdnagnireenignEygolonhceTrohtuAenilpicsiDecnerefeR.enilpicsidecnerefer:selcitradedoC1BelbaTBxidneppAC. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOlaruoivaheBsecneicS,yrtsitneD,enicideMdeillAdnagnisruNhtlaeHsmetsySnoitamrofnItnemeganaMdna,ecnaniF,scimonocEdnassenisuByrtsudnIretupmoCecneicSdnagnireenignEygolonhceTrohtuAenilpicsiDecnerefeR)deunitnoc(1BelbaT**)egaptxennodeunitnoc(**********************************)6102,.lateetnaclavaC(,.latesuobmalarahC()2102,gnahC()5102,.latenamhciF-tahcrahC()4102)1102,eDdnairuhduahC()3102,.lateinabihC()6102,.latesnilloC()1102,neneoC()7102,haillehC()3102,nehC()5102,supaTdnagnaD()2102,.latetropnevaD()7102,.lateninorC()7102,.latesitcideneBeD(,.lateníraM-zaPaled(,wokinzeleZdnadarnoC()5102)7102,.latenóeLed()7102,.laterekceD()2102,.latesiaheD()6102,oinaCeD()2102,.lateoniPleD()4102,.lateiweD()2102)4102,legeiSdnanaizisliD()2102,ülkürüÇdnacivoknrCgidoD()5102,naciriD()6102,.latenagoD()4102,.latebayroD()7102,werD(,uodinnaoIdnasagirD()2102,inajnaRdnajariaruD()3102,.lateuD()3102,zerimaRdnasdrawdE(,wahsnraEdnallecxE()5102,.lateehcanE()6102)5102)2102,rehcsiF()3102,idhaF(21C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOlaruoivaheBsecneicS,yrtsitneD,enicideMdeillAdnagnisruNhtlaeHsmetsySnoitamrofnItnemeganaMdna,ecnaniF,scimonocEdnassenisuByrtsudnIretupmoCecneicSdnagnireenignEygolonhceTrohtuAenilpicsiDecnerefeR)deunitnoc(1BelbaT************)egaptxennodeunitnoc(****************************)7102,enrobsOdnayerF()5102,ćirdnaJdnaedurF()5102,.lateyalobmoG()5102,.laterendleoG()5102,.latetrebliG(,yalbmerTdnatemaH()2102,.lateneaH(,zciwecnilKdnaknarF()6102)7102)2102,zcnoKdnaáksvoliH()1102,ésoRdnayelwoH()3102,.lateyawolloH()6102,.latenenjiuH()7102,hcsriH()6102,.latereltsgneH()1102,.latenosnaH()4102,.lateeH()4102,sidailI(22)5102,izzutnaSdnaekseJ()5102,mKidnagnaJ()3102,.latesemaJ()4102,.lategnoeJ()7102,.lateojenuJ()7102,.lategnuJ()4102,nosnhoJ()5102,.la)7102,.lateteajo-oviaK(ajo-oviaK()3102,.latealsohK()5102,.latemK(i)3102,eliK()4102,vonajotSdnaenniK()6102,.latekuhsniK()2102,.lategnotnilK()7102,.lateoK(,tropnevaDdnaanikoK()7102)7102,.latedursnrøjbloK()7102,.lateikslawoK(,resuahueNdnasperK()4102,.latenaarK()7102,.lateramuK()5102,.lateoduK()3102C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOlaruoivaheBsecneicS,yrtsitneD,enicideMdeillAdnagnisruNhtlaeHsmetsySnoitamrofnItnemeganaMdna,ecnaniF,scimonocEdnassenisuByrtsudnIretupmoCecneicSdnagnireenignEygolonhceTrohtuAenilpicsiDecnerefeR)deunitnoc(1BelbaT*************)egaptxennodeunitnoc(****************************,skcoclliWdnayticaL(,skcoclliWdnayticaL()7102,.lategnasT()7102,.lateeeL()b6102)a6102)1102,niwtiL()1102,dnuL()5102,ioL()4102,notxuL(,.latesoretsellaB-zenítraM()7102,.latesacaM()4102,.laterojaM()3102,sallisaCdnazepóL-zenítraM()2102,.latesrehtaM()1102,.latereganeM()6102,.laterelzteM()1102,redleflehciM()1102,hgehgahoM()5102,.laterykoM()7102)4102,sgnirKdnazinoM()7102,.latesirroM()4102,.latenibuM()1102,.lateoknehclinaD()4102,edihBdnakiaN()6102,.latenesleiN()6102,.lateuiN()1102,.latearumoN()5102,dahzeN()7102,.lateilocciP()6102,.lateañeP()6102,trawkniP()1102,sreteiP()6102,nosslhO()1102,rooN()6102,.latenaneeuQ()6102,.latetrehciR()5102,.latellessuR()6102,.lateossuR()6102,inamaS()6102,seveeR()4102,.lateuokaramaS()1102,.latesènanaS(23C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600rehtOlaruoivaheBsecneicS,yrtsitneD,enicideMdeillAdnagnisruNhtlaeHsmetsySnoitamrofnItnemeganaMdna,ecnaniF,scimonocEdnassenisuByrtsudnIretupmoCecneicSdnagnireenignEygolonhceTrohtuAenilpicsiDecnerefeR)deunitnoc(1BelbaT********************************,hcivolvaPdnanaijremeS()6102,.lateztrawhcS()4102,.latesreyaS(,namhaRdnarairhahS()8102,.lateardneS()7102)5102,attiNdnanajararadnuS()4102,ikswomilukS()5102,.latesidilatS()6102,nadirehS()5102)1102,rolyaTdnaamlazS()4102,rettoCdnarolyaT()6102,.latenottuS()5102,.latešepeT()5102,sarroT()2102,.lateewreMednav()7102,.latenrooDnav(,gietettarBdnaenreV()4102,.lateremlloV()3102,.lategnaW()5102,.latereyeW()3102,.latedooW()6102,gnirbloW(,xoFdnayikslopmaY()3102,.la)4102,.lateteuX(uX()7102,.lategnaY()2102,.lateuY()5102,eY()3102)6102,duomhaMdnaluolhgaZ()4102,.lateiksńaizuiZ()6102,.lategnehZ()3102,.latekeruZ()610224.nwonkton/defiicepston-:etoNC. Coombs, et al.ReferencesJournal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Abdel Raheem, A., Song, H.J., Chang, K.D., Choi, Y.D., Rha, K.H., 2017. Robotic nurse duties in the urology operative room: 11 years of experience. Asian J. Urol. 4,116–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajur.2016.09.012.Acemoglu, D., Autor, D., 2011. Skills, tasks and technologies: implications for employment and earnings. Handbook of Labor Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-7218(11)02410-5.Adelson, B., 2011. Task analysis, calculation and approximation: the work of stuart K. Card, 2007 bower laureate in computer & cognitive science for human-centeredcomputing. J. Franklin Inst. 348, 439–445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfranklin.2007.12.004.Alavi, M., Leidner, D.E., 2001. Knowledge management and knowledge management systems: conceptual foundations and research issues. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 25,107–136. https://doi.org/10.2307/3250961.Albu, A., Stanciu, L., 2015. Benefits of using artificial intelligence in medical predictions. In: 2015 E-Health Bioeng Conf. pp. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/EHB.2015.7391610.Aleksander, I., 2017. Partners of humans: a realistic assessment of the role of robots in the foreseeable future. J. Inf. Technol. 32, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41265-016-0032-4.Ali, I., Meghanathan, N., 2011. Virtual machines and networks – installation, performance, study, advantages and virtualization options. Int. J. Netw. Secur. Its Appl.11, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.5121/ijnsa.2011.3101.Alizadehsani, R., Zangooei, M.H., Hosseini, M.J., Habibi, J., Khosravi, A., Roshanzamir, M., Khozeimeh, F., Sarrafzadegan, N., Nahavandi, S., 2016. Coronary arterydisease detection using computational intelligence methods. Knowledge-Based Syst. 109, 187–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2016.07.004.Ambrose, M.L., 2014. The law and the loop. In: 2014 IEEE Int Symp. Ethics Sci. Technol. Eng. ETHICS 2014, https://doi.org/10.1109/ETHICS.2014.6893374.Amershi, S., Fogarty, J., Kapoor, A., Tan, D., 2011. Effective end-user interaction with machine learning. Proc. Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 1529–1532.https://doi.org/10.1145/2046396.2046416.Amrit, C., Paauw, T., Aly, R., Lavric, M., 2017. Identifying child abuse through text mining and machine learning. Expert Syst. Appl. 88, 402–418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.06.035.Ardiansyah, R.A., 2016. Design of an electronic narrator on assistant robot for blind people. MATEC Web of Conf. 1–5.Aron, R., Dutta, S., Janakiraman, R., Pathak, P.a., 2011. The impact of automation of systems on medical errors: evidence from field research. Inf. Syst. Res. 22,429–446.Ashrafian, H., 2014. Artificial Intelligence and Robot Responsibilities: innovating Beyond Rights. Sci. Eng. Ethics 317–326. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-014-9541-0.Ashrafian, H., 2015. AIonAI: A Humanitarian Law of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics. Sci. Eng. Ethics 21, 29–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-013-9513-9.Autor, D.H., 2015. Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace automation. J. Econ. Perspect. 29, 3–30. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.29.3.3.Autor, D.H., Levy, F., Murnane, R.J., 2003. The skill content of recent technological change: an empirical exploration. Q. J. Econ. 118, 1279–1333. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355303322552801.Baggili, I., Breitinger, F., 2015. Data sources for advancing cyber forensics: what the social world has to offer. AAAI Spring Symp. 2009–2012.Balfe, N., Sharples, S., Wilson, J.R., 2015. Impact of automation: measurement of performance, workload and behaviour in a complex control environment. Appl.Ergon. 47, 52–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2014.08.002.Balkin, T.J., Horrey, W.J., Graeber, R.C., Czeisler, C.a., Dinges, D.F., 2011. The challenges and opportunities of technological approaches to fatigue management.Accid. Anal. Prev. 43, 565–572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2009.12.006.Balram, Nikhil, Tošić, Ivana, Binnamangalam, Harsha, 2016. Digital health in the age of The Infinite Network. APSIPA Trans. Signal Inf. Process. 5. https://doi.org/10.1017/ATSIP.2016.6.Baril, C., Gascon, V., Brouillette, C., 2014. Impact of technological innovation on a nursing home performance and on the medication-use process safety. J. Med. Syst.38, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-014-0022-4.Barrett, M., Davidson, E., Prabhu, J., Vargo, S.L., 2015. Service innovation in the digital age: key contributions and future directions. MIS Q. 39, 135–154. https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2015/39:1.03.Barua, A., Barua, A., 2012. Gendering the digital body: women and computers. AI Soc. 27, 465–477. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-012-0371-9.Bekele, E.T., Lahiri, U., Swanson, A.R., Crittendon, J.A., Warren, Z.E., Sarkar, N., 2013. A step towards developing adaptive robot-mediated intervention architecture(ARIA) for children with autism. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 21, 289–299. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2012.2230188.Bekier, M., Molesworth, B.R., Williamson, A., 2011. Defining the drivers for accepting decision making automation in air traffic management. Ergonomics 54,347–356. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2011.558635.Bennett, C.C., Hauser, K., 2013. Artificial intelligence framework for simulating clinical decision-making: a Markov decision process approach. Artif. Intell. Med. 57,9–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2012.12.003.Bibel, W., 2014. Artificial Intelligence in a historical perspective. AI Commun. 27, 87–102. https://doi.org/10.3233/AIC-130576.Bilal, M., Persson, C., Ramparany, F., Picard, G., Boissier, O., 2012. Multi-agent based governance model for machine-to-machine networks in a smart parkingmanagement system. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. 6468–6472. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2012.6364789.Blanson, O.A., Bierman, B.P.B., Janssen, J., Looije, R., Neerincx, M.A., Dooren, M.M.M. Van, Vries, J.L.E. De, Jan, G., Burg, V. Der, Huisman, S.D., 2017. Design andevaluation of a personal robot playing a self-management education game with children with diabetes type 1. Int. J. Hum. – Comput. Stud. 106, 63–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2017.06.001.Bocci, T., Moretto, C., Tognazzi, S., Briscese, L., Naraci, M., Leocani, L., Mosca, F., Ferrari, M., Sartucci, F., 2013. How does a surgeon’s brain buzz? An EEG coherencestudy on the interaction between humans and robot. Behav. Brain Funct. 9, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1186/1744-9081-9-14.Bogue, R., 2011. Robots in the nuclear industry: a review of technologies and applications. Ind. Robot An Int. J. 38, 113–118. https://doi.org/10.1108/01439911111106327.Boman, M., Gillblad, D., 2015. Learning machines for computational epidemiology. Proc. – 2014 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, IEEE Big Data 2014, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData. 2014.7004419.Bostrom, N., 2014. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford University Press, Oxford.Bostrom, N., Yudkowsky, E., 2011. The ethics of artificial intelligence. In: Frankish, K., Ramsey, W. (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Artificial Intelligence. CambridgeUniversity Press, New York, pp. 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mpmed.2010.10.008.Broussard, M., 2015. Artificial intelligence for investigative reporting. Digit. Journal. 3, 814–831. https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2014.985497.Brscic, D., Ikeda, T., Kanda, T., 2017. Do you need help? A robot providing information to people who behave atypically. IEEE Trans. Robot. 33, 500–506. https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2016.2645206.Brynjolfsson, E., McAfee, A., 2011. Race Against The Machine: How The Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and IrreversiblyTransforming Employment and The Economy. Digital Frontier Press Lexington, MA.Brynjolfsson, E., McAfee, A., 2016. The Second Machine Age – Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. WW Norton & Co., New York andLondon.Bryson, J., Winfield, A., 2017. Standardizing ethical design for artificial intelligence and autonomous systems. Computer (Long. Beach. Calif) 50, 116–119. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2017.154.Bryson, J.J., 2016. Patiency is not a virtue : Intelligent artefacts and the design of ethical systems. In: Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.Phoenix, pp. 1–18.Burkhard, H.-D., 2013. Let the machines do. How intelligent is Artificial Intelligence? In: 36th International Convention on Information and CommunicationTechnology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO). pp. 947–952.Byun, S., Buyn, S.-E., 2011. Exploring perceptions toward biometric technology in service encounters: a comparison of current users and potential adopters. Behav. Inf.25C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Technol. 3001, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2011.553741.Calo, C.J., Hunt-Bull, N., Lewis, L., Metzler, T., 2011. Ethical implications of using the Paro robot with a focus on dementia patient care. In: Association for theAdvancement of Artificial Intelligence Workshop. San Francisco, pp. 20–24.Carneiro, N., Figueira, G., Costa, M., 2017. A data mining based system for credit-card fraud detection in e-tail. Decis. Support Syst. 95, 91–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2017.01.002.Castells, M., 1998. The Rise of the Network Society. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.Cavalcante, R.C., Brasileiro, R.C., Souza, V.L.F., Nobrega, J.P., Oliveira, A.L.I., 2016. Computational intelligence and financial markets: a survey and future directions.Expert Syst. Appl. 55, 194–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2016.02.006.Chang, A.C., 2012. Primary prevention of sudden cardiac death of the young athlete: the controversy about the screening electrocardiogram and its innovativeartificial intelligence solution. Pediatr. Cardiol. 33, 428–433. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00246-012-0244-5.Charalambous, G., Fletcher, S., Webb, P., 2015. Identifying the key organisational human factors for introducing human-robot collaboration in industry: an ex-ploratory study. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 81, 2143–2155. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-015-7335-4.Charchat-Fichman, H., Uehara, E., Santos, C.F., 2014. New technologies in assessment and neuropsychological rehabilitation. Temas em Psicol. 22, 539–553. https://doi.org/10.9788/TP2014.3-01.Chaudhuri, A., De, K., 2011. Fuzzy Support Vector Machine for bankruptcy prediction. Appl. Soft Comput. J. 11, 2472–2486. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2010.10.003.Chelliah, J., 2017. Will artificial intelligence usurp white collar jobs? Hum. Resour. Manag. Int. Dig. 25, 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1108/HRMID-11-2016-0152.Chen, L., 2013. The application of robots and eye tracking devices in a general dentist’s clinic. In: IEEE Third International Conference on Consumer Electronics,pp. 5–7.Chibani, A., Amirat, Y., Mohammed, S., Matson, E., Hagita, N., Barreto, M., 2013. Ubiquitous robotics: recent challenges and future trends. Rob. Auton. Syst. 61,1162–1172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2013.04.003.Chui, M., Manyika, J., Miremadi, M., 2016. Where machines could replace humans and where they can’t (yet). McKinsey Q. 3, 58–69.Coenen, F., 2011. Data mining: past, present and future. Knowl. Eng. Rev. 26, 25–29. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269888910000378.Collins, J.W., Patel, H., Adding, C., Annerstedt, M., Dasgupta, P., Khan, S.M., Artibani, W., Gaston, R., Piechaud, T., Catto, J.W., Koupparis, A., Rowe, E., Perry, M.,Issa, R., McGrath, J., Kelly, J., Schumacher, M., Wijburg, C., Canda, A.E., Balbay, M.D., Decaestecker, K., Schwentner, C., Stenzl, A., Edeling, S., Pokupić, S.,Stockle, M., Siemer, S., Sanchez-Salas, R., Cathelineau, X., Weston, R., Johnson, M., D’Hondt, F., Mottrie, A., Hosseini, A., Wiklund, P.N., 2016. Enhanced recoveryafter robot-assisted radical cystectomy: EAU robotic urology section scientific working group consensus view. Eur. Urol. 70, 649–660. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2016.05.020.Conrad, J.G., Zeleznikow, J., 2015. The role of evaluation in AI and law: an examination of its different forms in the AI and law journal. In: Proceedings of the 15thInternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pp. 181–186. https://doi.org/10.1145/2746090.2746116.Cronin, R.M., Fabbri, D., Denny, J.C., Rosenbloom, S.T., Jackson, G.P., 2017. A comparison of rule-based and machine learning approaches for classifying patientportal messages. Int. J. Med. Inform. 105, 110–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2017.06.004.Dang, T.H.H., Tapus, A., 2015. Stress game: the role of motivational robotic assistance in reducing user’s task stress. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 7, 227–240. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-014-0256-9.Danilchenko, A., Balachandran, R., Toennies, J.L., Baron, S., Munske, B., Fitzpatrick, J.M., Withrow, T.J., Webster, R.J., Labadie, R.F., 2011. Robotic mastoidectomy.Otol. Neurotol. 32, 11–16. https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0b013e3181fcee9e.Robotic.Dautenhahn, K., 2013. Human-robot interaction. In: The Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction. Interaction Design Foundation.Davenport, T.H., Kirby, J., 2015. Beyond automation. Harv. Bus. Rev. 93, 58–74.Davenport, T.H., Kirby, J., 2016a. Just how smart are smart machines? MITSloan Manag. Rev. 57, 21–25.Davenport, T.H., Kirby, J., 2016b. Only Humans Need Apply: Winners and Losers in the Age of Smart Machines. Harper Business, New York.Davenport, R.D., Mann, W., Lutz, B., 2012. How older adults make decisions regarding smart technology: an ethnographic approach. Assist. Technol. 24, 168–181.https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2012.659792.De Benedictis, A., Trezza, A., Carai, A., Genovese, E., Procaccini, E., Messina, R., Randi, F., Cossu, S., Esposito, G., Palma, P., Amante, P., Rizzi, M., Marras, C.E., 2017.Robot-assisted procedures in pediatric neurosurgery. Neurosurg. Focus 42, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.3171/2017.2.FOCUS16579.de la Paz-Marín, M., Campoy-Muñoz, P., Hervás-Martínez, C., 2012. Non-linear multiclassifier model based on Artificial Intelligence to predict research and devel-opment performance in European countries. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 79, 1731–1745. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.06.001.de León, A.D., Lalla-Ruiz, E., Melián-Batista, B., Marcos Moreno-Vega, J., 2017. A machine learning-based system for berth scheduling at bulk terminals. Expert Syst.Appl. 87, 170–182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.06.010.DeCanio, S.J., 2016. Robots and humans – complements or substitutes? J. Macroecon. 49, 280–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmacro.2016.08.003.Decker, M., Fischer, M., Ott, I., 2017. Service robotics and human labor: a first technology assessment of substitution and cooperation. Rob. Auton. Syst. 87, 348–354.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2016.09.017.Dedrick, J., Gurbaxani, V., Kraemer, K.L., 2003. Information technology and economic performance. ACM Comput. Surv. 35, 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/641865.641866.Dehais, F., Causse, M., Vachon, F., Tremblay, S., 2012. Cognitive conflict in human-automation interactions: a psychophysiological study. Appl. Ergon. 43, 588–595.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2011.09.004.Dehning, B., Richardson, V.J., 2002. Returns on investments in information technology: a research synthesis. J. Inf. Syst. 16, 7–30.Del Pino, J.S., Gheorghiu, R., Roman, A., 2012. The rest of me. Futures 44, 730–734. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2012.04.011.Dewi, T., Uchiyama, N., Sano, S., Takahashi, H., 2014. Swarm robot control for human services and moving rehabilitation by sensor fusion. J. Robot. 2014. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/278659.Dilsizian, S.E., Siegel, E.L., 2014. Artificial intelligence in medicine and cardiac imaging: harnessing big data and advanced computing to provide personalized medicaldiagnosis and treatment. Curr. Cardiol. Rep. 16, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-013-0441-8.Dirican, C., 2015. The impacts of robotics, artificial intelligence on business and economics. Proc. – Soc. Behav. Sci. 195, 564–573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.06.134.Dodig Crnkovic, G., Çürüklü, B., 2012. Robots: ethical by design. Ethics Inf. Technol. 14, 61–71. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-011-9278-2.Dogan, E., Chatila, R., Chauvier, S., Evans, K., 2016. Ethics in the design of automated vehicles: the AVEthics project. In: 1st Workshop on Ethics in the Design ofIntelligent Agents. pp. 1–6.Doryab, A., Min, J.K., Wiese, J., Zimmerman, J., Hong, J.I., 2014. Detection of behavior change in people with depression. AAAI Work. Work. Twenty-Eighth AAAIConf. Artif. Intell 12–16.Drew, J., 2017. Real talk about artificial intelligence and blockchain. J. Account. 224 (22–26), 28.Drigas, A.S., Ioannidou, R.-E., 2012. Artificial intelligence in special education: a decade review. Int. J. Eng. Educ. 28, 1366–1372.Du, K.K., Wang, Z.L., Hong, M., 2013. Human machine interactive system on smart home of IoT. J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun. 20, 96–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1005-8885(13)60240-X.Durairaj, M., Ranjani, V., 2013. Data mining applications in healthcare sector: a study. Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res. 2, 29–35.Edwards, P., Ramirez, P., 2016. When should workers embrace or resist new technology? New Technol. Work Employ. 31, 99–113. https://doi.org/10.1111/ntwe.12067.El-Najdawi, M.K., Stylianou, A.C., 1993. Expert support systems: integrating AI technologies. Commun. ACM 36, 55-ff. https://doi.org/10.1145/163298.163306.Enache, A.C., Ionita, M., Sgarciu, V., 2015. An immune intelligent approach for security assurance. In: 2015 Int. Conf. Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Anal.Assessment, CyberSA 2015. https://doi.org/10.1109/CyberSA.2015.7166116.Excell, P.S., Earnshaw, R.A., 2015. The Future of Computing – the Implications for Society of Technology Forecasting and the Kurzweil Singularity. In: IEEE26C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600International Symposium on Technology in Society (ISTAS) Proceedings, pp. 1–6.Fahdi, M. Al, 2013. Towards an automated forensic examiner (AFE) based upon criminal profiling & artificial intelligence. In: 11th Australian Digital ForensicsConference. Perth, pp. 1–9.Fischer, M., 2012. Interdisciplinary technology assessment of service robots: the psychological/work science perspective. Poiesis Prax. 9, 231–248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10202-012-0113-6.Frank, L., Klincewicz, M., 2016. Metaethics in context of engineering ethical and moral systems. SS-16-01-. AAAI Spring Symp. – Tech. Rep. 208–213.Frey, C.B., Osborne, M.A., 2017. The future of employment: how susceptible are jobs to computerisation? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 114, 254–280. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2016.08.019.Frude, N., Jandrić, P., 2015. The intimate machine ??? 30 years on. E-Learning Digit. Media 12, 410–424. https://doi.org/10.1177/2042753015571830.Gilbert, B.J., Goodman, E., Chadda, A., Hatfield, D., Forman, D.E., Panch, T., 2015. The role of mobile health in elderly populations. Curr. Geriatr. Reports 4, 347–352.https://doi.org/10.1007/s13670-015-0145-6.Goeldner, M., Herstatt, C., Tietze, F., 2015. The emergence of care robotics – a patent and publication analysis. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 92, 115–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2014.09.005.Gombolay, M.C., Huang, C., Shah, J.A., 2015. Coordination of human-robot teaming with human task preferences. AAAI Fall Symposium Series on AI-HRI. Arlington.Grace, K., Salvatier, J., Dafoe, A., Zhang, B., Evans, O., 2018. When will AI exceed human performance? Evidence from AI experts. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 62, 729–754.Haen, C., Barra, V., Bonaccorsi, E., Neufeld, N., 2012. Artificial intelligence in the service of system administrators. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 396, 052038. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/396/5/052038.Hamet, P., Tremblay, J., 2017. Artificial intelligence in medicine. Metabolism. 69, S36–S40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2017.01.011.Hanson, M.A., Barth, A.T., Silverman, C., 2011. In home assessment and management of health and wellness with BeClose ambient, artificial intelligence. Proc. 2ndConf. Wirel. Heal. – WH ’11 1. https://doi.org/10.1145/2077546.2077574.He, S., Song, R., Chaudhry, S.S., 2014. Service-oriented intelligent group decision support system: application in transportation management. Inf. Syst. Front. 16,939–951. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-013-9439-4.Hengstler, M., Enkel, E., Duelli, S., 2016. Applied artificial intelligence and trust: the case of autonomous vehicles and medical assistance devices. Technol. Forecast.Soc. Change 105, 105–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2015.12.014.Hilovská, K., Koncz, P., 2012. Application of artificial intelligence and data mining techniques to financial markets. ACTA VSFS 6, 62–77.Hirsch, P.B., 2017. The robot in the window seat. J. Bus. Strategy 38, 47–51. https://doi.org/10.1108/JBS-04-2017-0050.Hislop, D., Bosua, R., Helms, R., 2018. Knowledge Management in Organisations: A Critical Introduction, 4th ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford.Holloway, B.B., Deitz, G.D., Hansen, J.D., 2013. The benefits of sales force automation (SFA): an empirical examination of SFA usage on relationship quality andperformance. J. Relatsh. Mark. 12, 223–242. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332667.2013.846735.Howley, I., Rosé, C.P., 2011. Modeling the rhetoric of human-computer interaction. In: 14th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 341–350.Huijnen, C.A.G.J., Lexis, M.A.S., Jansens, R., de Witte, L.P., 2016. Mapping Robots to Therapy and Educational Objectives for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.J. Autism Dev. Disord. 46, 2100–2114. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-016-2740-6.IBM, 2017. IBM Policies and Principles [WWW Document]. URL https://www.ibm.com/ibm/responsibility/ibm_policies.html#transparency (accessed 1.15.17).Iliadis, L., 2014. Special issue of the 8th aiai 2012 (artificial intelligence applications and innovations) international conference. Artif. Intell. Rev. 42, 309–311.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-013-9421-z.James, K.L., Barlow, D., Bithell, A., Hiom, S., Lord, S., Oakley, P., Pollard, M., Roberts, D., Way, C., Whittlesea, C., 2013. The impact of automation on pharmacy staffexperience of workplace stressors. Int. J. Pharm. Pract. 21, 105–116. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2042-7174.2012.00231.x.Jang, M., Kim, J., 2015. A relationship-based model of robot service personalization. In: The 12th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots and AmbientIntelligence, pp. 192–193.Jankel, N.S., 2015. AI vs. human intelligence: Why computers will never create disruptive innovations [WWW Document]. HuffingtonPost. URL http://www.huffingtonpost.com/nick-seneca-jankel/ai-vs-human-intelligence-_b_6741814.html (accessed 7.4.18).Jeong, G.M., Park, C.W., You, S., Ji, S.H., 2014. A study on the education assistant system using smartphones and service robots for children regular paper. Int. J. Adv.Robot. Syst. 11, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.5772/58389.Jeske, D., Santuzzi, A.M., 2015. Monitoring what and how: Psychological implications of electronic performance monitoring. New Technol. Work Employ. 30, 62–78.https://doi.org/10.1111/ntwe.12039.Johnson, D.G., 2014. Technology with no human responsibility? J. Bus. Ethics 127, 707–715. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-014-2180-1.Junejo, F., Amin, I., Hassan, M., Ahmed, A., Hameed, S., Author, C., 2017. The application of artificial intelligence in grinding operation using sensor fusion. Int. J.GEOMATE 12, 11–18.Jung, J., Song, H., Kim, Y., Im, H., Oh, S., 2017. Intrusion of software robots into journalism: the public’s and journalists’ perceptions of news written by algorithms andhuman journalists. Comput. Human Behav. 71, 291–298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.022.Kaivo-oja, J., Virtanen, P., Jalonen, H., Stenvall, J., 2015. The effects of the internet of things and big data to organizations and their knowledge management practices.In: In: Uden, L., Heričko, M., Ting, I.H. (Eds.), Knowledge Management in Organizations. KMO 2015. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, vol 224Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21009-4.Khosla, R., Chu, M.T., Nguyen, K., 2013. Affective robot enabled capacity and quality improvement of nursing home aged care services in Australia. In: Proceedings –International Computer Software and Applications Conference. pp. 409–414. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMPSACW.2013.89.Kaivo-oja, J., Roth, S., Westerlund, L., 2017. Futures of robotics. Human work in digital transformation. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 73, 176–205. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJTM.2017.083074.Kile, F., 2013. Artificial intelligence and society: a furtive transformation. AI Soc. 28, 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-012-0396-0.Kim, C., Kim, D., Yuan, J., Hill, R.B., Doshi, P., Thai, C.N., 2015. Robotics to promote elementary education pre-service teachers’ STEM engagement, learning, andteaching. Comput. Educ. 91, 14–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2015.08.005.Kinne, E., Stojanov, G., 2014. Grounding drones’ ethical use reasoning. In: Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. Québec City, pp. 231–235.Kinshuk, Chen, N.S., Cheng, I.L., Chew, S.W., 2016. Evolution is not enough: revolutionizing current learning environments to smart learning environments. Int. J.Artif. Intell. Educ 26, 561–581. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-016-0108-x.Klintong, N., Vadhanasindhu, P., Thawesaengskulthai, N., 2012. Artificial intelligence and successful factors for selecting product innovation development. In:Proceedings – 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Systems Modelling and Simulation, ISMS 2012. pp. 397–402. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMS.2012.86.Ko, T., Lee, J.H., Cho, H., Cho, S., Lee, W., Lee, M., 2017. Machine learning-based anomaly detection via integration of manufacturing, inspection and after-salesservice data. Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 117, 927–945. https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-06-2016-0195.Kokina, J., Davenport, T.H., 2017. The emergence of artificial intelligence: how automation is changing auditing. J. Emerg. Technol. Account. 14, 115–122. https://doi.org/10.2308/jeta-51730.Kolbjørnsrud, V., Amico, R., Thomas, R.J., 2017. Partnering with AI: how organizations can win over skeptical managers. Strateg. Leadersh. 45, 37–43. https://doi.org/10.1108/SL-12-2016-0085.Kowalski, J., Krawczyk, B., Woźniak, M., 2017. Fault diagnosis of marine 4-stroke diesel engines using a one-vs-one extreme learning ensemble. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.57, 134–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2016.10.015.Kraan, K.O., Dhondt, S., Houtman, I.L.D., Batenburg, R.S., Kompier, M.A.J., Taris, T.W., 2014. Computers and types of control in relation to work stress and learning.Behav. Inf. Technol. 33, 1013–1026. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2014.916351.Kreps, G.L., Neuhauser, L., 2013. Artificial intelligence and immediacy: designing health communication to personally engage consumers and providers. Patient Educ.Couns. 92, 205–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2013.04.014.Kudo, F., Akitomi, T., Moriwaki, N., 2015. An artificial intelligence computer system for analysis of social-infrastructure data. In: 2015 IEEE 17Th Conference onBusiness Informatics, pp. 85–89. https://doi.org/10.1109/CBI.2015.26.27C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Kumar, S., Pragatheeswarane, M., Sharma, A.P., Bishnoi, K., Sharma, M.K., Panwar, V.K., Sethi, S., 2017. Expanding the horizon of robotic surgery to large pelvicparaganglioma. J. Robot. Surg. 11, 247–250. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11701-016-0648-y.Kurzweil, R., 2005. The Singularity is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. Viking Press, New York.Kuusisto, J., Meyer, M., 2003. Insights into services and innovation in the knowledge intensive economy. Technol. Rev. 134, 1–63.Lacity, M.C., Willcocks, L.P., 2016a. Robotic process automation at telefónica O2. MIS Q. Exec. 15, 21–35.Lacity, M.C., Willcocks, L.P., 2016b. A new approach to automating services. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 58, 41–49.Lee, H., Troschel, F.M., Tajmir, S., Fuchs, G., Mario, J., Fintelmann, F.J., Do, S., 2017. Pixel-level deep segmentation: artificial intelligence quantifies muscle oncomputed tomography for body morphometric analysis. J. Digit. Imaging 30, 487–498. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10278-017-9988-z.Litwin, A.S., 2011. Technological change at work: the impact of employee involvement on the effectiveness of health information technology. Ind. Labor Relations Rev.64, 863–888.Loebbecke, C., Picot, A., 2015. Reflections on societal and business model transformation arising from digitization and big data analytics: a research agenda. J. Strateg.Inf. Syst. 24, 149–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2015.08.002.Loi, M., 2015. Technological unemployment and human disenhancement. Ethics Inf. Technol. 17, 201–210. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-015-9375-8.Lund, H.H., 2011. Anybody, anywhere, anytime – robotics with a social impact through a building block approach. In: Proceedings of IEEE Workshop on AdvancedRobotics and Its Social Impacts. ARSO, pp. 2–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ARSO.2011.6301970.Luxton, D.D., 2014. Artificial intelligence in psychological practice: current and future applications and implications. Prof. Psychol. Res. Pract. 45, 332. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034559.Major, L., Kyriacou, T., Brereton, P., 2014. The effectiveness of simulated robots for supporting the learning of introductory programming: a multi-case case study.Comput. Sci. Educ. 24, 193–228. https://doi.org/10.1080/08993408.2014.963362.Makridakis, S., 2017. The forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI) revolution: its impact on society and firms. Futures 90, 46–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FUTURES.2017.03.006.Mallach, E.G., 2000. Decision Support and Data Warehouse Systems. Irwin McGraw-Hill, Boston.Macas, M., Lagla, L., Fuertes, W., Guerrero, G., Toulkeridis, T., 2017. Data Mining model in the discovery of trends and patterns of intruder attacks on the data networkas a public-sector innovation. In: 2017 4th Int. Conf. eDemocracy eGovernment, ICEDEG 2017, pp. 55–62. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEDEG.2017.7962513.Manyika, J., Lund, S., Chui, M., Bughin, J., Woetzel, J., Batra, P., Ko, R., Sanghvi, S., 2017. Jobs lost, jobs gained: What the future of work will mean for jobs, skills, andwages [WWW Document]. URL https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-work/jobs-lost-jobs-gained-what-the-future-of-work-will-mean-for-jobs-skills-and-wages (accessed 11.7.19).Marjanovic, O., Cecez-Kecmanovic, D., 2017. Exploring the tension between transparency and datification effects of open government IS through the lens of ComplexAdaptive Systems. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 26, 210–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2017.07.001.Markoff, J., 2016. Machines of Loving Grace: The Quest for Common Grounds Between Humans and Robots. Harper Collins, New York.Markus, M.L., 2017. Datification, organizational strategy, and IS research: What’s the score? J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 26, 233–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2017.08.003.Martínez-Ballesteros, M., García-Heredia, J.M., Nepomuceno-Chamorro, I.A., Riquelme-Santos, J.C., 2017. Machine learning techniques to discover genes with po-tential prognosis role in Alzheimer’s disease using different biological sources. Inf. Fusion 36, 114–129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2016.11.005.Martínez-López, F.J., Casillas, J., 2013. Artificial intelligence-based systems applied in industrial marketing: an historical overview, current and future insights. Ind.Mark. Manag. 42, 489–495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2013.03.001.Mathers, N., Goktogen, A., Rankin, J., Anderson, M., 2012. Robotic mission to mars: hands-on, minds-on, web-based learning. Acta Astronaut. 80, 124–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.06.003.McAfee, A., Brynjolfsson, E., 2017. Machine, Platform. Crowd. W. W. Norton & Company, New York and London.Melville, N., Kraemer, K.L., Gurbaxani, V., 2004. Information technology and organizational performance: an integrative model of IT business value. MIS Q. 28,283–322. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148636.Menager, N.E., Coulomb, M.A., Lambaudie, E., Michel, V., Mouremble, O., Tourette, C., Houvenaeghel, G., 2011. Place du robot dans la formation chirurgicale initiale:Enqu??te aupr??s des internes. Gynecol. Obstet. Fertil. 39, 603–608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gyobfe.2011.07.025.Metzler, T.A., Lewis, L.M., Pope, L.C., 2016. Could robots become authentic companions in nursing care? Nurs. Philos. 17, 36–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/nup.12101.Michelfelder, D.P., 2011. Dirty hands, speculative minds, and smart machines. Philos. Technol. 24, 55–68. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-010-0009-0.Mohaghegh, S.D., 2011. Reservoir simulation and modeling based on artificial intelligence and data mining (AI&DM). J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 3, 697–705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2011.08.003.Mokyr, J., Vickers, C., Ziebarth, N.L., 2015. The history of technological anxiety and the future of economic growth: is this time different? J. Econ. Perspect. 29, 31–50.Moniz, A., Krings, B.J., 2014. Technology assessment approach to human-robot interactions in work environments. In: Proceedings – 2014 7th InternationalConference on Human System Interactions, HSI 2014. pp. 282–289. https://doi.org/10.1109/HSI.2014.6860490.Morris, K.C., Schlenoff, C., Srinivasan, V., 2017. Guest editorial a remarkable resurgence of artificial intelligence and its impact on automation and autonomy. IEEETrans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 14, 407–409. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2016.2640778.Mubin, O., D’Arcy, T., Murtaza, G., Simoff, S., Stanton, C., Stevens, C., 2014. Active or passive?: Investigating the impact of robot role in meetings. In: Proceedings –IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication. pp. 580–585. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.2014.6926315.Naik, G., Bhide, S.S., 2014. Will the future of knowledge work automation transform personalized medicine? Appl. Transl. Genomics 3, 50–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atg.2014.05.003.Newell, S., Marabelli, M., 2015. Strategic opportunities (and challenges) of algorithmic decision-making: a call for action on the long-term societal effects of “dati-fication” J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 24, 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2015.02.001.Nezhad, H.R.M., 2015. Cognitive Assistance at Work, in: AAAI 2015 Fall Symposium. pp. 37–40.Nielsen, J.A., Andersen, K.N., Sigh, A., 2016. Robots conquering local government services: a case study of eldercare in Denmark. Inf. Polity 21, 139–151. https://doi.org/10.3233/IP-160381.Niu, J., Tang, W., Xu, F., Zhou, X., Song, Y., 2016. Global Research on Artificial Intelligence from 1990–2014: spatially-explicit bibliometric analysis. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 5, 66. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi5050066.Nomura, T., Kanda, T., Yamada, S., Suzuki, T., 2011. Exploring influences of robot anxiety into HRI. In: Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 2011 6th ACM/IEEEInternational Conference On. pp. 213–214. https://doi.org/10.1145/1957656.1957737.Noor, A., 2011. Intelligent adaptive cyber-physical ecosystem for aerospace engineering education, training, and accelerated workforce development. J. Aerosp. Eng.24, 403–408. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)AS.1943-5525.0000128.Ohlsson, S., 2016. Constraint-based modeling: from cognitive theory to computer tutoring – and back again. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ. 26, 457–473. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-015-0075-7.Parasuraman, R., 1997. Humans and automation: use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Hum. Factors 39, 230–253.Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T.B., Wickens, C.D., 2000. A model for types and levels of human interaction with automation. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. - Part A Syst.Humans 30, 286–297. https://doi.org/10.1109/3468.844354.Paré, G., Trudel, M.-C.C., Jaana, M., Kitsiou, S., 2015. Synthesizing information systems knowledge: a typology of literature reviews. Inf. Manag. 52, 183–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2014.08.008.Peña, P., Del Hoyo, R., Vea-murguía, J., Rodrigálvarez, V., Calvo, J.I., Martín, J.M., 2016. Moriarty: improving ‘Time To Market’ in big data and Artificial intelligenceapplications. Int. J. Des. Nat. Ecodynamics 11, 230–238. https://doi.org/10.2495/DNE-V11-N3-230-238.Piccoli, M., Mullineris, B., Santi, D., Gozzo, D., 2017. Advances in robotic transaxillary thyroidectomy in Europe. Curr. Surg. Reports 5, 17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40137-017-0180-7.Pieters, W., 2011. Explanation and trust: what to tell the user in security and AI? Ethics Inf. Technol. 13, 53–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-010-9253-3.28C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600Pinkwart, N., 2016. Another 25 Years of AIED? Challenges and opportunities for intelligent educational technologies of the future. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ. 26,771–783. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-016-0099-7.Queenan, C., Kull, T., Devaraj, S., 2016. Complements or substitutes? Culture-technology interactions in healthcare. Decis. Sci. 47, 851–880. https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12199.Raheem, A.A., Song, H.J., Chang, K.D., Choi, Y.D., Rha, K.H., 2017. Robotic nurse duties in the urology operative room: 11 years of experience. Asian J. Urol. 4,116–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajur.2016.09.012.Reeves, J., 2016. Automatic for the people: the automation of communicative labor. Commun. Crit. Stud. 13, 150–165. https://doi.org/10.1080/14791420.2015.1108450.Richert, a, Shehadeh, M., Müller, S., Schröder, S., Jeschke, S., 2016. Robotic workmates: Hybrid human-robot-teams in the industry 4.0. In: Proceedings of theInternational Conference on E-Learning, ICEL. pp. 127–131.Ross, C., Swetlitz, I., 2017. IBM pitched its Watson supercomputer as a revolution in cancer care. It’s nowhere close [WWW Document]. Stat. URL https://www.statnews.com/2017/09/05/watson-ibm-cancer/ (accessed 1.15.18).Russell, S., Hauert, S., Altman, R., Veloso, M., 2015. Ethics of Artificial intelligence [– Take a stand on AI weapons –] [– Shape the debate, don’t shy from it –] [–Distribute AI benefits fairly –] [– Embrace a robot-human world –]. Nature 521, 415–418. https://doi.org/10.1038/521415a.Russo, L., Rosa, S., Maggiora, M., Bona, B., 2016. A novel cloud-based service robotics application to data center environmental monitoring. Sensors 16, 1255–1273.https://doi.org/10.3390/s16081255.Samani, H., 2016. The evaluation of affection in human – robot interaction. Kybernetes 45. https://doi.org/10.1108/K-09-2015-0232.Samarakou, M., Fylladitakis, E.D., Prentakis, P., Athineos, S., 2014. Implementation of artificial intelligence assessment in engineering laboratory education. Int. Conf.E-Learn. 299–303.Sananès, N., Garbin, O., Hummel, M., Youssef, C., Vizitiu, R., Lemaho, D., Rottenberg, D., Diemunsch, P., Wattiez, A., 2011. Setting up robotic surgery in gynaecology:the experience of the Strasbourg teaching hospital. J. Robot. Surg. 5, 133–136. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11701-010-0231-x.Sayers, W., Savić, D., Kapelan, Z., Kellagher, R., 2014. Artificial intelligence techniques for flood risk management in urban environments. Proc. Eng. 70, 1505–1512.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2014.02.165.Schryen, G., 2013. Revisiting IS business value research: what we already know, what we still need to know, and how we can get there. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 22, 139–169.https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2012.45.Schwartz, T., Krieger, H., Zinnikus, I., 2016. Hybrid teams: flexible collaboration between humans, robots and virtual agents. In: Proceedings of the 14th GermanConference on Multiagent System Technologies, pp. 131–146.Semerjian, A., Pavlovich, C.P., 2017. Extraperitoneal robot-assisted radical prostatectomy: indications, technique and outcomes. Curr. Urol. Rep. 18, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11934-017-0689-4.Sendra, S., Parra, L., Lloret, J., Tomás, J., 2018. Smart system for children’s chronic illness monitoring. Inf. Fusion 40, 76–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2017.06.002.Shahriar, M.S., Rahman, M.S., 2015. Urban sensing and smart home energy optimisations: a machine learning approach. IoT-App 2015 - Proc. 2015 Int. Work. InternetThings Towar Appl. co-located with SenSys 2015, 19–22. https://doi.org/10.1145/2820975.2820979.Sheridan, T.B., 2016. Human-Robot Interaction: status and challenges. Hum. Factors 58, 525–532. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720816644364.Sheridan, T.B., Parasuraman, R., 2005. Human-automation interaction. Rev. Hum. Factors Ergon. 1, 89–129. https://doi.org/10.1518/155723405783703082.Skulimowski, A.M.J., 2014. Future Prospects of Human Interaction. In: International Conference on Adaptive and Intelligent Systems. Bournemouth, pp. 131–141.Smith, H.J., Dinev, T., Xu, H., 2011. Theory and review information privacy research: an interdisciplinary review. MIS Q. 35, 989–1015.Soh, C., Markus, M.L., 1995. In: How IT creates Business Value: A Process Theory Synthesis. Association for Information Systems, Amsterdam, pp. 29–41. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJSTM.2010.029673.Stalidis, G., Karapistolis, D., Vafeiadis, A., 2015. Marketing decision support using artificial intelligence and knowledge modeling: application to tourist destinationmanagement. Proc. – Soc. Behav. Sci. 175, 106–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.01.1180.Sundararajan, S.C., Nitta, S.V., 2015. Designing engaging intelligent tutoring systems in an age of cognitive computing. IBM J. Res. Dev. 59, 10:1–10-9. https://doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2015.2464085.Sutton, S.G., Holt, M., Arnold, V., 2016. “The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated”—artificial intelligence research in accounting. Int. J. Account. Inf. Syst. 22,60–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2016.07.005.Szalma, J.L., Taylor, G.S., 2011. Individual differences in response to automation: the five factor model of personality. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 17, 71–96. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0024170.Tarafdar, M., Beath, C.M., Ross, J.W., 2017. Enterprise cognitive computing applications – opportunities and challenges. IT Prof. 19, 21–27. https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2017.3051321.Taylor, A.K., Cotter, T.S., 2014. Human-Machine Intelligence Interaction in Aviation. In: Proceedings of the American Society for Engineering Management. p. 1.Tepeš, M., Krajnik, P., Kopač, J., Semolič, B., 2015. Smart tool, machine and special equipment: overview of the concept and application for the toolmaking factory ofthe future. J. Brazilian Soc. Mech. Sci. Eng. 37, 1039–1053. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40430-014-0229-9.Torras, C., 2015. Social robots: a meeting point between science and fiction. MÈTODE Sci. Stud. J. 5, 111–115. https://doi.org/10.7203/metode.82.3546.Tsang, Lincoln, Kracov, Daniel A., Mulryne, J., Strom, Louise, Perkins, Nancy, Wallace, Victoria M., 2017. The impact of artificial intelligence on medical innovation inthe European Union and United States. Intellect. Prop. Technol. Law J. 29, 3–12.van de Merwe, K., Oprins, E., Eriksson, F., van der Plaat, A., 2012. The influence of automation support on performance, workload, and situation awareness of airtraffic controllers. Int. J. Aviat. Psychol. 22, 120–143. https://doi.org/10.1080/10508414.2012.663241.van Doorn, J., Mende, M., Noble, S.M., Hulland, J., Ostrom, A.L., Grewal, D., Petersen, J.A., 2017. Domo arigato Mr. Roboto: emergence of automated social presencein organizational frontlines and customers’ service experiences. J. Serv. Res. 20, 43–58. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670516679272.Verne, G., Bratteteig, T., 2016. Do-it-yourself services and work-like chores: on civic duties and digital public services. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. 20, 517–532. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-016-0936-6.Vollmer, A.L., Mühlig, M., Steil, J.J., Pitsch, K., Fritsch, J., Rohlfing, K.J., Wrede, B., 2014. Robots show us how to teach them: Feedback from robots shapes tutoringbehavior during action learning. PLoS One 9, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0091349.Wang, C.-M., Tseng, S.-H., Wul, P.-W., Xu, Y.-H., Liao, C.-K., Lin, Y.-C., Chiang, Y.-S., Lim, C.-D., Chu, T.-S., FU, L.-C., 2013. Human-oriented recognition for intelligentinteractive office robot. In: 13th International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems, pp. 960–965. https://doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evv015.Webster, J., Watson, R.T., 2002. Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: writing a literature review. MIS Q. 26, 13–23.Weyer, J., Fink, R.D., Adelt, F., 2015. Human-machine cooperation in smart cars. An empirical investigation of the loss-of-control thesis. Saf. Sci. 72, 199–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2014.09.004.Wolbring, G., 2016. Employment, disabled people and robots: what is the narrative in the academic literature and canadian newspapers? Societies 6, 15. https://doi.org/10.3390/soc6020015.Wood, L.J., Dautenhahn, K., Rainer, A., Robins, B., Lehmann, H., Syrdal, D.S., 2013. Robot-mediated interviews – how effective is a humanoid robot as a tool forinterviewing young children? PLoS One 8. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0059448.Xiao, B., Benbasat, I., 2007. E-commerce product recommendation agents: use, characteristics, and impact. MIS Q. 31, 137–209. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148784.Xu, J., Le, K., Deitermann, A., Montague, E., 2014. How different types of users develop trust in technology: a qualitative analysis of the antecedents of active andpassive user trust in a shared technology. Appl. Ergon. 45, 1495–1503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2014.04.012.Xu, S., Tu, D., He, Y., Tan, S., Fang, M., 2013. ACT-R-typed human–robot collaboration mechanism for elderly and disabled assistance. Robotica 32, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0263574713001094.Yampolskiy, R., Fox, J., 2013. Safety engineering for artificial general intelligence. Topoi 32, 217–226. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-012-9128-9.Yang, S., Wei, R., Guo, J., Xu, L., 2017. Semantic inference on clinical documents: combining machine learning algorithms with an inference engine for effective29C. Coombs, et al.Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29 (2020) 101600clinical diagnosis and treatment. IEEE Access 5, 3529–3546. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2672975.Ye, J.J., 2015. Artificial intelligence for pathologists is not near-It is here: description of a prototype that can transform how we practice pathology tomorrow. Arch.Pathol. Lab. Med. 139, 929–935. https://doi.org/10.5858/arpa.2014-0478-OA.Ye, L.R., Johnson, P.E., 1995. The impact of explanation facilities on user acceptance of expert systems advice. MIS Q. 19, 157–172. https://doi.org/10.2307/249686.You, S., Robert, L.P., 2018. Emotional attachment, performance, and viability in teams collaborating with embodied physical action (EPA) robots. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst.19, 377–407. https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00496.Yu, Q., Yuan, C., Fu, Z., Zhao, Y., 2012. An autonomous restaurant service robot with high positioning accuracy. Ind. Rob. 39, 271–281. https://doi.org/10.1108/01439911211217107.Zaghloul, A.S., Mahmoud, A.M., 2016. Preliminary results of robotic colorectal surgery at the National Cancer Institute, Cairo University. J. Egypt. Natl. Canc. Inst. 28,169–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnci.2016.05.003.Zheng, L., Chen, L.G., Huang, H.B., Li, X.P., Zhang, L.L., 2016. An overview of magnetic micro-robot systems for biomedical applications. Microsyst. Technol. 22, 1–17.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00542-016-2948-6.Zheng, X., Lee, M.K.O., 2016. Excessive use of mobile social networking sites: negative consequences on individuals. Comput. Human Behav. 65, 65–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.08.011.Ziuziański, P., Furmankiewicz, M., Sołtysik, A., 2014. E-health artificial intelligence system implementation: case study of knowledge management dashboard ofepidemiological data in Poland. Int. J. Biol. Biomed. Eng. 8, 164–171.Zurek, E.E., Guerrero, G., Reyes, C., Hernandez, R.J., Jabba, D., Wightman, P.M., Salazar, A., Torres, J.E., Nieto-Bernal, W., 2013. Fast identification process of librarycall numbers for on the shelf books using image processing and artificial intelligence techniques. ISIEA 2013–2013 IEEE Symp. Ind. Electron. Appl. 222–226.https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIEA.2013.6738998.30