Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922Contents lists available at ScienceDirectJournal of Biomedical Informaticsj o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / y j b i nUsing UMLS to construct a generalized hierarchical concept-based dictionaryof brain functions for information extraction from the fMRI literatureMei-Yu Hsiao a, Chien-Chung Chen b, Jyh-Horng Chen a,*a Interdisciplinary MRI/MRS Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwanb Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwana r t i c l ei n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:Received 27 May 2008Available online 22 April 2009Keywords:NeuroinformaticsTerm recognitionTerm classificationBrain-function association modelHuman brain studyWith a rapid progress in the field, a great many fMRI studies are published every year, to the extent that itis now becoming difficult for researchers to keep up with the literature, since reading papers is extremelytime-consuming and labor-intensive. Thus, automatic information extraction has become an importantissue. In this study, we used the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) to construct a hierarchical con-cept-based dictionary of brain functions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first generalized dictio-nary of this kind. We also developed an information extraction system for recognizing, mapping andclassifying terms relevant to human brain study. The precision and recall of our system was on a par withthat of human experts in term recognition, term mapping and term classification. Our approach pre-sented in this paper presents an alternative to the more laborious, manual entry approach to informationextraction.(cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionFunctional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which measuresthe blood metabolism of neural activities [1], is a non-invasive ap-proach for studying human brain function. Over the past 15 years,fMRI has become extremely popular among neuroscientists. As aresult, a profusion of fMRI studies are published every year, innumerous journals. Hence, it is becoming difficult for researchersto keep up with the literature by reading papers, as this activityis extremely time-consuming and labor-intensive. Therefore, auto-mated analysis of unstructured texts using a text mining techniquesuch as that proposed here, may be of great help to scientists.The main challenge in text mining, especially in the field of neu-roscience, is the problem of data entry. Presently, the automatic re-trieval and extraction of large amounts of data for analysis is stilldifficult, and most databases rely on inputting information manu-ally. For instance, the first annotated database for published neuro-imaging studies was BrainMap [2,3], the interface of which allowedresearchers to search by querying experimental parameters, biblio-graphical details, or specialized locations in Talairach space [4].However, the scale of BrainMap was limited; presently, only 61behavior related terms or function names, and 72 experimentalparadigms, are available in the database. Such a limited scalemay be inevitable, because BrainMap relies on researchers to input* Corresponding author. Address: Interdisciplinary MRI/MRS Lab, Department ofElectrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd.,Taipei 106, Taiwan. Fax: +886 2 2369 9465.E-mail address: jhchen@ntu.edu.tw (J.-H. Chen).1532-0464/$ - see front matter (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2009.04.003data manually. The lack of automatic processing severely limits thescope of the database and reduces its usefulness.The goal of the work presented in this paper was to build anautomatic information extraction (IE) tool that can extract termsrelated to brain anatomy, function and experimental tasks fromthe fMRI literature. Such an approach should allow for the process-ing of a large amount of text data in a relatively short period andcould overcome the shortcomings of the manual entry approach,as discussed above. In addition, to demonstrate the possible appli-cations of this system, we constructed a brain-function co-occur-rence association modelto assist with identifying termsassociated with human brain function.IE is a method that allows automatic recognition of meaningfulwords or phrases from unstructured text. A variety of IE methodshave been applied to bioinformatics, either in dictionary-based[5] or rule-based approaches [6,7], in applications including detec-tion of disease, protein and gene names [8–11]. IE methods havealso been used for identifying relationships between differentterms—for example, protein–protein interactions [12–15]. Whilemuch progress has been made in applying IE to bioinformatics,unfortunately, it is difficult to apply these achievements directlyto a different domain, such as neuroscience, as the textual featuressubject to IE are highly domain-specific.Not many studies on IE for the neuroscience literature havebeen published. Natural language processing (NLP) has not beenapplied to neuroinformatics until recently [16–20]. One well-known example however is NeuroScholar, which is a knowledgemanagement system for the neuroscience literature that allowsM.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922913authors to annotate papers, make notes and share them with oth-ers who also use that same platform [21–23]. Presently, Neuro-Scholar is developing useful NLP tools to make it easier for theuser to make annotations efficiently. NeuroScholar and our systemmay be complementary to each other. Since the NeuroScholar doesnot provide an association model, whereas our approach does, andit is difficult to extract the relations between different terms inNeuroScholar. Hence, our approach can help authors in Neuro-Scholar to expedite the annotation of brain functions, experimentaltasks and their relations easily throughout the literature.In a different approach to mining a neuroimaging database,Nielsen et al. [24] report a method that searches for associationsbetween Talairach coordinates and textual descriptions in the ab-stract using bag-of-words feature vectors. However, this methoduses high-frequency unigrams as candidate terms of brain func-tion; thus, it can only identify popular topics and cannot retrieve‘‘working memory”). An alternative ap-multi-word names (e.g.proach to term recognition is machine learning. This approachhas only limited use however, since an annotated corpus for super-vised learning does not at present exist in neuroscience.Another issue for automatic information extraction is that ofidentifying what to extract. One approach is to develop a set ofontologies/terminologies that can work together with the informa-tion extraction algorithms. A critical issue is the task of identifying,defining and mapping concept definitions. In an fMRI study, a neu-roscientist is most interested in (1) brain responses to a certainexperimental task; (2) the areas of the brain in which these re-sponses occur; and (3) the brain functions implied by these re-sponses. That is, the three key concepts in an fMRI paper arebrain anatomy, experimental tasks that the participants wereasked to perform during the scan and the brain functions thatare involved in these tasks. While the anatomy of the brain maybe acquired from numerous knowledge sources, such as the Foun-dational Model of Anatomy [25] and NeuroNames [26,27], no auto-matic tool yet exists for extracting information regarding brainfunctions and experimental tasks from the vast literature. Thus,we constructed a generalized brain function dictionary from theUnified Medical Language System (UMLS), which is supported bythe National Library of Medicine. UMLS is an important resourcefor information extraction in the biomedical domain [28,29]. To re-solve the problem of synonymous terms, that is, the failure ofextracting relevant literature that uses synonyms rather than theexact form of the search word, UMLS used a concept-based Meta-thesaurus to cluster synonymous terms together. This approach al-lows users to find the concepts and not just the keywords. Eachconcept in UMLS Metathesaurus has been assigned one or moresemantic types, which are high-level categories in the biomedicaldomain. However, while UMLS does include concepts for brainfunctions, each concept involves a number of terms from a numberof dictionaries. Hence, the challenge here is to retrieve and mergeconcepts from various sources.In this study, we used UMLS for constructing a hierarchical dic-tionary of brain function terms collected from a variety of vocabu-lary sources and a hybrid method that combined a dictionary and arule-based approach for recognizing and classifying concepts re-lated to human brain studies. We present two examples of usingthe extracted concepts to construct the brain-function co-occur-rence association model for studying areas of the brain relevantto memory function, and brain functions relevant to the amygdala.Our approach should provide an improvement to current text min-ing methods by resolving the data entry problem in the field ofneuroinformatics.2. MethodsFig. 1 shows the system architecture of our method. This systemtakes abstracts of papers from a publicly available database, suchas Medline, and breaks each abstract into sentences. Then theFig. 1. System architecture of the human brain information extraction system. The data layer splits the Medline abstract into sentence processing units. The procedure layeris the core of the information extraction task. The terms in each sentence were first extracted by term recognition and then classified by term classification stages. In thedatabase layer, synonym and function tree databases were constructed using UMLS and were used to support both term recognition and term classification. See text for detail.914M.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922system uses a two-step approach to extract terms. The first step isterm recognition. As described in Section 2.2, this combines a dic-tionary and a rule-based approach to identify words that describeexperimental tasks and brain functions. The second step is termclassification. As described in Section 2.3, this uses n-gram approx-imate term mapping to identify terms and assign them to catego-ries. Both steps are supported by a dictionary. However, to the bestof our knowledge, there is no appropriate, adequately comprehen-sive resource of brain function vocabulary available. Thus, we con-structed a hierarchical concept-based brain function tree to serveas our dictionary, using UMLS. Section 2.1 describes the processof dictionary construction.2.1. Construction of a hierarchical concept-based dictionary of brainfunctionsTo support term recognition, we first constructed a generalizedhierarchical concept-based dictionary of brain functions relevantto the field of neuroscience from UMLS. In this study, we utilizedtwo properties of UMLS to form a hierarchical concept-based brainfunction dictionary. The first property is that UMLS combinesterms with similar meanings into concepts; the second is thatterms are arranged with a ‘‘parent–child” hierarchy. Thus, our taskis to construct the relations among concepts from relations amongterms.We used a command line in UMLS (http://umlsks.nlm.nih.gov/kss/servlet/CommandLine) to map a term to its concept. The com-mand line with parameter ‘‘command=ks –meta –cst –def -chd” al-lowed retrieval of the term’s concept (allowing that there could bemore than one concept), synonyms, definition, semantic type andchild terms included in the different vocabulary sources of UMLS.We traced a complete hierarchical tree starting from the UMLSterms ‘‘mental process”, ‘‘cognitive processes” and ‘‘psychologicalfunction”.The dictionary construction was a recursive process. It operatedas follows: (1) Map a term, say, Term A, to its concept. Initially,Term A would be one of the starting terms mentioned above andwould be updated in step 3. (2) If the concept of Term A is alreadyin our database—that is, this concept has been traced before andthus Term A is a synonym of this concept—then add Term A tothe synonyms list of its concept and stop tracing Term A. (20)Otherwise, retrieve relevant synonyms, definitions, semantic andchild terms of the concept of Term A. (3) Trace all child termsacross various vocabulary sources. This is achieved by updatingTerm A with its child terms and then repeating steps 1 and 2.(30) If a child term has been traced before, that is, this child termis also a child of other parent terms and is already in our database,then add this term as a child of Term A and stop tracing this childterm.Notice that the various vocabulary sources in UMLS contain adiversity of terms, since the sources were constructed with differ-ent users in mind. Hence, not all the terms emerging from our dic-tionary construction process were relevant to brain function. Forthese terms, we used the UMLS semantic type to filter them. Ex-perts in neuroscience were involved in deciding which semanticsor concepts were not appropriate for our purpose. After the prun-ing process, we re-arranged the brain function tree as a hierarchi-cal concept-oriented tree.2.2. Term recognitionThe purpose of term recognition is to extract a target term fromthe fMRI literature. Our algorithm (Section 2.2.1) utilized the brainfunction tree (Section 2.1) as the dictionary for term extraction.However, a dictionary constructed from existing sources (UMLS)might not be comprehensive. In order to avoid missing importantterms, we also utilized a rule-based approach, which recognizedterms surrounded by specific information items, to extract brainfunctions and experimental tasks (Section 2.2.2). In addition, wediscuss the detail of text processing modules shared by both dictio-nary-based and rule-based algorithms, in Section 2.2.3.2.2.1. The dictionary-based term recognition systemOur dictionary-based term recognition method used an approx-imate matching algorithm to improve recognition performance[11]. In addition, to deal with spelling variation, we extended en-tries of synonyms in the dictionary for a more comprehensive cov-erage [10,11].We used the brain function tree described in Section 2.1 as thedictionary source and a part-of-speech (POS) paradigm [30] to de-tect left and right boundaries of a term in a sentence. The POS-based approximate matching algorithm extracted not only termsthat exactly matched a term in the dictionary but also those thatpartially matched. The advantage of approximate matching wasan improvement in efficiency of term mapping, and the collectingof more information about this term [11]. For example, ‘‘memory”in the dictionary not only retrieved ‘‘memory”, but also retrieved‘‘delayed recall memory” from abstracts. In addition, the extractedterm ‘‘delayed recall memory” was mapped to a concept of ‘‘de-layed memory”, not ‘‘memory” (the detailed algorithm of termmapping is described in Section 2.3.1).‘‘memory short term”,For even more comprehensive coverage, we extended entriesof synonyms in the dictionary dealing with word order and punc-tuation. For example, ‘‘memory, short-term” was expanded to sixentries: ‘‘memory, short-term”, ‘‘memory, short term”, ‘‘memoryshort-term”,‘‘short-term memory” and‘‘short term memory”. It has been shown that this approach canimprove term recognition performance over the straightforwardapproach of looking-up a table [10,11]. In addition, we eliminatedsome words at the end of entries because they could decrease re-trieval precision. For example, ‘‘episodic memory, function” wasmodified to ‘‘episodic memory”. This allowed for a retrieval ofmore terms than those using only that exact wording. Somehighly ambiguous terms, such as ‘‘mr”, which could be an abbre-viation for either ‘‘mental retardation” or ‘‘magnetic resonance”,were removed manually. This prevented the retrieval of manyfalse positive terms, especially in the fMRI literature (e.g. T2-weighted MR).2.2.2. The rule-based term recognition systemThe method of dictionary-based term recognition was used toextract brain function terms from the brain function dictionary.There is, however, no dictionary available for experimental tasks,another important component in an fMRI study. Furthermore,some names for an experimental task are compound words createdor modified by authors. One example is the n-back task, where thenumber ‘n’ is modified for a particular experimental design, such asa 2-back task. For this reason, a rule-based term extractor was anessential supplement for retrieval of experimental task names.A rule-based system uses rules to extract named entities sur-rounded by specific information items [6]. In our approach, a ruleconsisted of four components: the trigger word, the mappingdirection, boundary conditions and maximum word length. A trig-ger word started the extraction when a parsing algorithm found amatch between a term in a sentence and a trigger. The mappingdirection would then specify whether an extraction should proceedto the left or to the right from the trigger word in a sentence. Theboundary conditions specified the stop criteria of the parsing algo-rithm. The condition was a compound of symbols, as shown inFig. 2. The maximum word length specified the maximum lengthof an extracted term. If the extracted term length was greater thanthe length limit, the extracted result would be discarded. Each ruleM.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922915Fig. 2. Condition pattern symbols. Parameters A and B can be a POS tag or a specificstring.was given a class label for later term classification (Section 2.3). Anexample of term extraction is shown in Fig. 3.For the rule-based approach to work appropriately, the key taskis to choose proper trigger words. To address this issue, we usedmining collocates to find trigger words [9], and extracted newterms from the collected abstracts. We first decomposed sentencesinto tokens, that is, individual words. We then removed stopwords, or words with high-frequency but irrelevant to the IE, suchas ‘‘the”, ‘‘that”, or ‘‘what”, and anatomical names. A stemming pro-cess was then applied to the remaining tokens. We then calculatedthe frequency of each token and chose terms from the 10 most fre-quently used tokens as trigger words. Fig. 4 shows the flowchart ofhow these trigger words were acquired. Table 1 shows the 10 stemcandidate trigger words determined by this method. For instance,‘‘role” was one of the trigger words. In most abstracts, ‘‘role” de-scribes a function that a particular brain structure performs. Forexample, ‘‘The corpus callosum plays a ‘‘role” in mediating inter-hemisphere communication”. Thus, using ‘‘role” as a trigger wordallowed for identification of anatomical brain structure function.Sometimes, a recognition rule may miss important information.For example, suppose that we have two sentences: (1) ‘‘Functionalimaging has consistently shown that attention-related areas of medialfrontal and posterior parietal cortices are active during the attentionalconflict induced by color naming in the presence of distracting words(Stroop task)” and (2) ‘‘Performance of the conventional Stroop specif-ically activated the anterior cingulate, insula, premotor and inferiorfrontal regions”. In Sentence (1), we can retrieve ‘‘Stroop” using‘‘task” as a trigger word. However, the rule-based algorithm wouldfail to extract the same word in Sentence (2) because there were notrigger words in the sentence to start the algorithm. In order toavoid such losses, we implemented a feedback learning moduleto extract them. In our feedback learning module, once an ex-tracted phrase such as ‘‘Stroop” is extracted by the rule-based algo-rithm and is classified as an experimental task (see Section 2.3 forthe classification method), we treat it as an entry in our dictionaryand locate the same term in other sentences with the dictionary-based extraction algorithm (Section 2.2.1). In addition, since mostcognitive tests take an initial capital letter, to reduce false posi-tives, we choose only terms with a capital letter in the feedbacklearning module.2.2.3. The text processing modulesTerm recognition in our system included four reusable text pro-cessing modules: POS tagging, stop word removal, abbreviationdetection and pattern matching. For each input sentence, ‘‘POS tag-ging” was first employed to code the part-of-speech tag of eachword and to detect term boundaries. Then, ‘‘stop word removal”was used for eliminating unwanted words. The ‘‘abbreviationdetection” module was applied when a term was followed byparentheses. Note that only simple abbreviations consisting of ini-tial characters were detected. The pattern matching modulematched a user-defined pattern which was either a POS tag or aspecific string.Fig. 3. Sample pattern, sentence and extracted result.Fig. 4. The pipeline process for acquiring trigger words.Table 1Trigger word candidates: The top 10 stem tokens.12345678910Stem wordActiveAssociStudiRoleProcessInvolvFunctionTaskSuggestFindOriginal termActivate activated activates activation activations active actively activityAssociate associated association associations associativeStudied studies studyRoleProcess processes processingInvolve involved involvement involves involvingFunction functionality functionsTask tasksSuggest suggesting suggestive suggestsFind finding findings916M.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922After pattern matching, we used two filtering strategies to re-move unwanted phrases and to increase the efficiency of termrecognition. The first one was the POS filter. Since nouns are amajor part of the named entities, we used the POS filter to discardextracted phrases that did not contain a noun. To avoid filteringout the truly functional terms that used only an adjective tag,we used POS to tag all entries in the brain function dictionaryand put those with only an adjective tag in a list. Subsequentlywe retained and extracted terms that were in that list. With thisstrategy, we effectively increased the precision of term recogni-tion. We also applied the same POS method to deal with the issueof conjunctions. If an extracted phrase had a POS pattern like‘‘adjective_1 and adjective_2 noun”, such as ‘‘spatial and verbalworking memory” we could recover phrases like ‘‘adjective_1noun” and ‘‘adjective_2 noun”, such as ‘‘spatial working memory”and ‘‘verbal working memory”, rather than ‘‘adjective_1” and‘‘adjective_2 noun”, such as ‘‘spatial” and ‘‘verbal working mem-ory. This strategy thus can enhance recall by extracting more cor-rect terms.A second strategy was to filter out the functional designation ofa brain area. Brain regions are generally named according to struc-tural or functional significance. For example, the area surroundingthe calcarine sulcus is generally called the primary visual cortex.However, a search for the dictionary term ‘‘visual” would producea retrieval error. Most functional designations are compoundwords, with a function term followed by a noun, such as ‘‘area”,‘‘cortex”, ‘‘region”, etc. In our study, we discarded terms that wererelated to functional designation of an anatomical entity. This in-creased precision in the searches.2.3. Term classificationOnce the text was extracted, the algorithm of n-gram approxi-mate term mapping was used for term mapping and term classifi-cation. Mapping of extracted phrases to a concept space improvedprecision of query results. For example, when searching ‘‘short-term memory”, the system returned data not only in ‘‘short-termmemory” but also in ‘‘immediate memory” and ‘‘short memory”,because these are terms for the same concept in UMLS. Term clas-sification was a task that assigned terms to categories. In thisstudy, we focused on two categories: the experimental tasks givenby the experimenters and the brain functions that are supposed tobe revealed by these experimental tasks. The rules of categoryassignment are listed below:(1) If a term can be extracted by the dictionary-based methodwith the brain function dictionary, it is a function.(2) If a term is extracted by the rule-based method with a ‘‘task”class rule, and it can be mapped to the brain function dictionary, itis also a function. Otherwise, it is a task. The reason for this rule isthat in the fMRI literature, authors often use the word ‘‘task” to de-scribe an experiment that studies a particular brain function butnot what the participants were performing. For example, ‘‘workingmemory task” is a task to study working memory function while incontrast, ‘‘1-back task” describes what the participants needed to‘‘face perception” can be ex-perform in an experiment. Hence,tracted from the sentence ‘‘Autistic people fail to activate the ‘fusi-form face area’ during face perception tasks” with a rule of ‘‘task”class and can be mapped to a brain function concept and thereforeit is a function. On the other hand, ‘‘Stroop” from ‘‘Functional imag-ing has consistently shown that attention-related areas of medial fron-tal and posterior parietal cortices are active during the attentionalconflict induced by color naming in the presence of distracting words(Stroop task)”, cannot be mapped to a function in our brain functiondictionary and therefore it is a task.(3) However, if a term extracted by the rule-based method iscapitalized and can be mapped to a brain function concept, thenthis term is a proper noun and belongs to both the task and func-tion categories (e.g. ‘‘Continuous Visual Memory Test” is a task butalso maps to the function ‘‘visual memory”).2.3.1. n-Gram approximate term mappingIt is reported that the n-gram approach can successfully detectmedical compound words [31]. We generated n-gram candidateterms and used rules to determine the best concept. The n-gramalgorithm takes a small group of words and produces compoundsfrom combinations of these words. Then, these compounds, ratherthan words in their original order, are used for term mapping. Thisalgorithm has the advantage both of reducing the noisy stringproblem and of increasing the string matching rate. Here, the term‘‘n-gram” refers to ‘‘n” number of words in a phrase. We assumedthat the longest matching n-gram (maximum n-gram) coveredthe best definition of the extracted phrase. We set the upper limitfor ‘‘n” to six for efficiency. The algorithm of n-gram approximatematching is described below:(1) If the extracted phrase exactly matches a concept, retrievethis concept and stop. Otherwise, go to step 2.(2) Perform n-gram decomposition to produce candidate termst1–tn.(3) Match all decomposed terms to concepts c1–cn in the brainfunction dictionary.(4) For each concept c1–cn, check whether cj is a child of ck,where j = 1, 2, ... , n; k = 1, 2, ... , n, in the brain function hier-archy tree. If it is, remove the parent concept ck from thecandidate list. Repeat this step recursively until there is norelation between candidates.(5) For each remaining concept, calculate the n-gram degree ofthe concept as the number of words of the original decom-posed terms in step 2.(6) If there are concepts with the same degree, go to step 7.Otherwise return the concept with the largest degree asthe best concept.(7) If there are concepts with the same n-gram degree, returnthe one mapped to the term located closest to the end ofthe extracted phrase.In our generalized hierarchical concept-based dictionary ofbrain functions, a child term usually referred to as a narrower con-cept than the parent term; for example, visuospatial memory(child term) is a specific kind of memory (parent term). We usedthis heuristic information to map terms to narrower conceptsand therefore chose the child term, rather than the parent term,as the result of term mapping in step 4.Fig. 5 shows an example, with the n-gram decomposition of theextracted phrase ‘‘visuospatial recognition memory”. Only ‘‘visuo-‘‘recognition” (n = 1) and ‘‘memory”spatial memory” (n = 2),(n = 1) were mapped exactly in the brain function dictionary. Afterstep 4, we removed the broader concept ‘‘memory” because ‘‘mem-ory” is a parent of ‘‘visuospatial memory” in the hierarchical tree ofbrain function. In step 6, we mapped the phrase ‘‘visuospatial rec-ognition memory” as the concept ‘‘visuospatial memory”.Fig. 5. Sample phrase and the n-gram decomposition result.M.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922917suffix -ies was replaced with -y). Third, to decrease ambiguity ofterm mapping to two concepts, we chose the semantic that be-longed to a ‘‘mental process” in the first instance. Alternatively,we chose the concept with the same word. If these conditions wereunavailable, we made a random choice.3. Results and evaluation3.1. Representation of the brain function tree (brain functiondictionary)The brain function dictionary was constructed using UMLS. Webegan with 7429 terms in 5566 concepts. After pruning, we endedup with 3720 concepts marked as functions in 13 semantic typesfrom 23 vocabulary sources (Fig. 6). In the synonym list, 9546out of 9702 synonyms were each mapped to only one concept. Thisreduced ambiguity while achieving optimal concept selection. Asshown in Table 2, most concepts belonged to two semantics:‘‘mental or behavior dysfunction” or ‘‘mental process”. It is alsopossible to split the brain function tree into two categories: brainfunction (positive relation) and dysfunction (negative relation).Fig. 7 shows a subset of brain function terms combined with themultiple source view and the concept view.Fig. 6. Distribution of source vocabulary in the brain function dictionary.In order to improve the efficiency of term mapping, three moresteps were used. First, if a term was a single word and capitalized,we checked the abbreviation list retrieved by the abbreviationextraction module described in Section 2.2.3. We retrieved and re-placed the abbreviated term with its long form. For instance, WMwas replaced by working memory, TOL was replaced by Tower ofLondon. Second, we established rules for transferring terms toproper nouns or restoring the singular form (e.g. a term with theTable 2Semantic types in the brain function dictionary.3.2. EvaluationSemanticMental or behavioral dysfunctionMental processLanguageSign or symptomIndividual behaviorPathologic functionOrgan or tissue functionTemporal conceptPhysiologic functionResearch activitySpatial conceptNeoplastic processFungusNo. of concepts2039672642208112392111116331Evaluating our system performance was not an easy task be-cause, to the best of our knowledge, there is no well-establishedtest for fMRI IE. Thus, we conducted two experiments to evaluatethe performance of our algorithm against manual entry approach.We used ‘‘(fMRI + human) not animal” as our keywords to retrieveabstracts from PubMed. The basic processing unit for term recogni-tion was a sentence. Then, five cognitive psychologists annotatedthe answers in each experiment. The majority-voting schemewas used to decide the correct answer.The evaluation of the algorithm was based on three standardinformation retrieval metrics—precision, recall and F-score, as de-fined below:Fig. 7. A subset of the brain function dictionary. (a) Terms combined with the multiple source view. (b) Terms combined with the concept view.918M.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922Fig. 8. Five possible types of term recognition for evaluating system and human recognition ability.Precision: No. of correctly extracted text/no. of extractedtext = TP/(TP + FP),Table 4Comparison of the five human results and the algorithm performance.Recall: No. of correctly extracted text/no. of correct text = TP/Precision (%)Recall (%)F-Score (%)(TP + FN), andF-score: 2 (cid:2) (precision (cid:2) recall)/(precision + recall),where TP, FP and FN are the numbers of true positives, false posi-tives and false negatives, respectively.3.2.1. Evaluation of term recognitionTo evaluate our extraction method, we randomly selected 100sentences from our database. Eighty of these sentences containedthe named entities extracted by our algorithm (to test hit rateand false negative) while 20 were from sentences without the ex-tracted named entities (to test false positive). Five cognitive psy-chologists (two post docs and three 5th or 6th year graduatestudents with majors in cognitive psychology from the Departmentof Psychology, National Taiwan University) manually annotatedthe 100 sentences for terms relating to experimental tasks or func-tion/dysfunction. Correct answers were established by a majorityvote. For each term, there were five types of recognition (Fig. 8):(1) Partial match: only part of a text’s constitutive words werematched, regardless of how many constitutive words werematched in that text.(2) Complete match: all constitutive words of a text werematched.(3) Exact match: the text from system extraction and the correctanswer were exactly matched.(4) False positive match: text extracted by the system, but not byhumans.(5) False negative match: system misses an extraction.Table 3 summarizes the results. For an exact match, there was58% precision, 59% recall, and an F-score of 58%. The 10 partialmatch terms had the same meaning as human results after termmapping. Including partial and complete matches, we obtainedan approximate match of precision, recall and F-score up to 72%,73%, and 72%, respectively. The false positives were mostly fromterms with high-frequency and multiple meanings in the fMRI lit-erature (e.g. ‘‘orientation” and ‘‘complication”) or names referringTable 3System term recognition results.(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)Match typePartial matchComplete matchExact matchFalse positive matchFalse negative matchNo. of terms105613028Retrieved terms: (a) + (b) + (c) + (d).Correct answer: (a) + (b) + (c) + (e).Approximate match: (a) + (b) + (c).12345HumanAlgorithm896790919486729193938872877390789189828672to a dysfunction that had a wide range of symptoms (e.g. ‘‘schizo-phrenia”). The false negatives were mostly from terms that wereeither not in the dictionary or context sensitive (e.g. ‘‘abstraction”and ‘‘categorization”).Annotation results from the five experts were also comparedwith the correct answers (Table 4). By bootstrapping analysis[32], the average precision was 86, with confidence intervals of[83, 89] at the 95% confidence level. Bootstrapping involved a per-mutation of responses across the five experts for each item andthen recalculation of precision for each individual. This procedurewas repeated 10,000 times to derive a distribution of human per-formance. The level of human performance could be consideredas a reference for evaluating the performance of algorithms. Notethat even experts in the field did not reach 100% precision.Table 5 shows results from term classification of 76 approxi-mate extractions. We achieved 93% in category assignment in thetask class, suggesting that term classification performs well in taskcategory assignment (row 1). It should be noted that 13 terms clas-sified as functions by our system were classified as tasks by ex-perts. Upon closer examination, nine (69%) of these terms wereannotated to both task and function by two of the five experts. Thisindicated that these terms might belong to multiple categories forexperts.3.2.2. Evaluation of term mappingIn order to evaluate term mapping, we randomly selected 100sentences containing named entities extracted by our algorithmthat were relevant to memory concepts. Five cognitive psycholo-gists (one post doc and two graduate students from the previousexperiment and two 5th year graduate students from a biopsychol-ogy of learning and memory laboratory) who are experts inTable 5Term classification result.System resultExpert answerTask/testFunction/dysfunctionBothTask/testFunction/dysfunctionBoth281320250260M.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922919Table 6Examples of term mapping error.Test sentenceSystemExpert(a) We recently reported that patients who had received unilateral temporal lobectomy, including the amygdala and hippocampus,MemoryMemory by contentshow impaired acquisition in a fear conditioning task, indicating a deficit in [emotional memory](b) Most literature on the human hippocampus stresses its [non-spatial memory] functions, but older work in rodents and someother species emphasized the role of the hippocampus in spatial learning and memory as well(c) We hypothesize that activity within these multiple frontal regions provides a functional influence (input) to medical temporalregions that bind the information together into a [lasting episodic memory trace]SpatialmemoryMemorytraceMemory by contentEpisodic memory,functionThe test phrase was marked with square bracket in the test sentence.memory research, manually mapped every term to 99 concepts(including terms related to function and dysfunction). Although itwas possible to assign multiple concepts to each phrase, the ex-perts were forced to choose the best one. On average, each experttook 5 h to complete this experiment.Applying our n-gram approximate term mapping algorithm, wecould reach up to 61% consistency with the human experts whilethe base-line method of simple mapping could achieve only 8%consistency. The 39 mapping inconsistencies between the algo-rithm and the human experts were of the following categories:(1) Eighteen inconsistencies occurred because there were norelevant synonyms in the list. In a forced choice situationthe expert simply chose what they considered as the bestmatch from the available concepts in the list. (e.g. (1) inTable 6).(2) Seven were due to an outdated dictionary. For example,‘‘working memory” and ‘‘short-term memory” were usedinterchangeably in the earlier literature but have come tobe considered as two distinct concepts in recent years (asreflected in recent cognitive psychology textbooks [33]),but were not considered as separate terms in UMLS. Thus,experts were unable to find the corresponding concept inthe list.(3) Four were context dependent (e.g. (2) in Table 6).(4) Three (not including the problems mentioned in (2)) weredue to the fact that no suitable concept exists in the braindictionary and thus were misclassified.(5) Three were considered to be assessments of memory, not aterm describing brain function.(6) Only three were actual algorithm mapping errors (e.g. (3) inTable 6).(7) One was a word order problem or a missed synonym prob-‘‘small memory delay” should be mapped tolem (e.g.‘‘delayed memory” not ‘‘memory”).Six of the 39 terms, while they were mapped inconsistentlyby the experts and by the algorithm, should be considered anacceptable alternative. This indicates that some terms mighthave been mapped to multiple concepts. If these terms, andthe seven terms which were mapped incorrectly due to the dic-tionary update problem, are considered, the system’s accuracyactually reached 74%.4. Examples of information usageThis section provides examples of how the extracted informa-tion may be used. The most important information to be gainedfrom fMRI experiments is an understanding of brain activities.For this purpose, we gave researchers brain-function co-occurrenceassociation models from various publications. In the brain-functionassociation models, if brain anatomy and function are mentionedtogether in a large number of MEDLINE sentences, it implies thatthere is an underlying biological relationship between the two.We used ‘‘(fMRI + human) not animal” as our key words to re-trieve abstracts from PubMed MEDLINE. We have 124,450 ab-stracts (3156 journals) from 1985 to the current period in ourdatabase, which updates automatically monthly. Function and taskterms were extracted using our method. Brain anatomy was ex-tracted using NeuroNames [26,27], a neuro-anatomical thesaurusin UMLS, and filtered with the Talairach database [4]. Below, wepresent a model of memory and a model of amygdala.Fig. 9 presents the results of the brain-function co-occurrenceassociation model for memory. The results showed that a clearand strong relationship existed between memory function andthe temporal lobe, the hippocampus and the frontal lobe. This isconsistent with previous empirical reports. For example, Kolband Whishaw [34] showed that these brain regions all play an im-port role in memory. For each brain region, users could expand thesearch further to identify more memory related brain functions inthese areas. As shown in Fig. 10, the temporal lobe and the hippo-campus contribute not only to memory in general but also toshort-term memory in particular, and the temporal lobe is alsoimportant in many content related memory functions, such as vi-sual memory, spatial memory and semantic memory. The brain-function association model for the amygdala is shown in Fig. 11.Using our hierarchical brain function dictionary to classify func-tion, we were able to show that the amygdala is involved in emo-tion and learning. This result is consistent with neurobiologicalstudies.It is anticipated that scientists will be able to better understandand compose a meaningful representation of human brain activi-ties through the integration of data related to brain functionsand structural areas. Furthermore, it is hoped that this will helpscientists reduce human reading time and increase efficiency sig-nificantly, by allowing them to digest specific knowledge beforedesigning experiments and comparing their results with the pres-ent literature.5. Discussion and conclusionAs described in Section 2, we developed a system to extractterms related to experimental tasks and brain functions. We alsofound that results using POS tagging to retrieve multi-word namedentities were better than from use of the unigram method. To thebest of our knowledge, this is the first study to extract brain func-tions and experimental tasks automatically. The generalized hier-archical concept-based dictionary we have developed can behelpful for further studies in text mining, as can algorithms forautomatic retrieval of brain functions and their hierarchical rela-tionships for cross-referencing.Conventional approaches of constructing a dictionary by havingexperts input information manually have the advantage of achiev-ing a more accurate dictionary but are limited in the number ofterms, synonyms, concepts and the relationships between eachconcept. This task requires a number of experts with knowledgeof neuroscience working together for a long time to accomplish.In our dictionary, we merged 23 vocabulary sources to yield a920M.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922Fig. 9. The brain-function association model of memory with co-occurrence coefficients P2. Co-occurrence coefficients shown on the lines indicate the number of sentencesin which brain function and brain area co-occur in the same sentence. The gray arrow lines between the two anatomical nodes indicate the ‘‘a-part-of” relation and the nodesto which the arrows point are the parent nodes.Fig. 10. The expanded memory brain-function association model. The ellipse shape indicates the brain area node and the rectangle shape indicates the extended brainfunction node.broader coverage. This allows experts to just insert, delete and re-organize the relationships of brain functions based on large andauthentic dictionary sources, such as MeSH, Psychological IndexTerms and the like. It is easier and quicker for experts to constructa comprehensive brain function dictionary in this way.even in a manually constructed knowledge source, our system canhelp experts to annotate a large number of terms (such as brainfunctions, brain regions and experimental tasks) and map termsto their concepts in a very short period, and thus overcome theshortcomings of manual entry approaches.In our term mapping evaluation experiment, each expert tookabout 5 h to complete the assignment. This illustrates how time-consuming and tedious term mapping is for human experts. Thus,Our system, however, does come with limitations. In the termrecognition task, our method was limited by the terms availablein the dictionary. Consequently, our system is liable to miss termsM.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922921Fig. 11. The brain-function association model of amygdala with co-occurrence coefficients P3. Legend shows the color of high order concepts in brain function order by thesum of the child nodes co-occurrence number.that are not in the dictionary. The rule-based algorithm may beable to find terms that are not in the dictionary. However, it is nextto impossible to implement all possible rules used by an expertwhile keeping the efficiency of the system. Hence, rule-based algo-rithms, even with the help of the feedback-learning algorithm, arenot foolproof with respect to any text. In term classification, a func-tion term extracted by the rule-based approach may be classifiedas an experimental task if this term is not in the brain function dic-tionary. That is, a function term correctly extracted in the term rec-ognition stage may be misclassified if the system cannot find it inthe brain function dictionary.These limitations showed that the main constraint of our sys-tem is the brain function dictionary, which in turn is restrictedby the incomplete UMLS. To the best of our knowledge, there isno comprehensive dictionary specific for brain functions. In addi-tion, as new terms for brain function continue to emerge, neurosci-entists by no means have consensus on the nomenclature of brainfunctions. There are databases containing relevant terms. Some ofthem contain more brain function terms than others. For instance,the SNOMED Clinical Terms contributes 2339 terms while MeSHcontributes only 382 terms (Fig. 6). In our dictionary, we mergedterms from 23 vocabulary sources to yield a broader coverage thanany single source. With such a broad, though incomplete, coverage,our system can achieve 72% precision and 73% recall for term rec-ognition, and this is on a par with human expert performance.Hence, we expect that performance can improve when there arebetter vocabulary sources available.The system could be improved by making the dictionary moreextensive. The brain function dictionary constructed for this studycould also provide a platform from which experts are able to ex-pand, validate and maintain the entries in the dictionary. Further-more, the phrases extracted by our system could be used as anextension of the available concepts in our brain function dictio-nary. For instance, ‘‘visual working memory” extracted here canbe taken as a branch of ‘‘working memory” in our brain functiondictionary. Such extensions may help us discover more knowledgein the future.Presently, there is no corpus of annotated research papers avail-able in neuroscience for a large-scale evaluation of the informationextraction algorithms. At this stage, a user online feedback systemwould be an important provision for constructing an annotatedcorpus by marking errors (such as errors of phrase boundary detec-tion and term mapping) and providing correct answers. Only anno-tated errors can accelerate the construction of such a corpus. Thissystem could help our approach by adjusting errors and the anno-tated corpus would be helpful for further study in evaluating theperformance of information extraction.In order to understand brain activities in fMRI study further, it isdesirable to expand our algorithm to more categories beyond thethree used in this study: brain anatomy, brain functions and exper-iment tasks, such an expansion may help meta-analysis of pub-lished material and in turn benefit experts in this field. Besides,integration of the brain-function association models into fMRIanalysis tools may be helpful in comparing experimental resultsfrom different studies.In conclusion, we have constructed a hierarchical concept-based dictionary of brain functions. To the best of our knowledge,this is the first generalized brain function dictionary. We have alsopresented a two-step approach for term recognition and classifica-tion to extract useful information from large-scale fMRI Medlineabstracts. Evaluations were performed by comparing the perfor-mance of the algorithm to that of human experts. Our system pro-duced promising results. To demonstrate the possible applicationsof this system, we constructed models for memory and for amyg-dala with the brain-function co-occurrence association model.While this study has its limitations, it can serve as a basis for fur-ther text mining studies in neuroinformatics.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Dr. Chung-Ming Chen, Dr. Der-YowChen, Dr. Hsin-Hsi Chen and Dr. Keng-Chen Liang for their helpfuldiscussions in this work. The authors thank anonymous reviewersfor their constructive comments. This research was supported inpart by National Science Council, Taiwan under contracts NSC95-2752-H-002-008-PAE, NSC96-2752-H-002-009-PAE, and NSC97-2321-B-002-044.References[1] Ogawa S, Tank DW, Menon R, Ellermann JM, Kim SG, Merkle H, et al. Intrinsicsignal changes accompanying sensory stimulation: functional brain mapping922M.-Y. Hsiao et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 (2009) 912–922with magnetic1992;89(13):5951–65.resonanceimaging.Proc NatlAcadSciUSA[2] BrainMap. Available from: http://brainmap.org/.[3] Laird AR, Lancaster JL, Fox PT. BrainMap: the social evolution of a human brainmapping database. Neuroinformatics 2005;3(1):65–78.[4] Lancaster JL, Woldorff MG, Parsons LM, Liotti M, Freitas CS, Rainey L, et al.Automated Talairach Atlas labels for functional brain mapping. Hum BrainMapp 2000;10(3):120–31.[5] Zhou L, Tao Y, Cimino JJ, Chen ES, Liu H, Lussier YA, et al. Terminology modeldiscovery using natural language processing and visualization techniques. JBiomed Inform 2006;39(6):626–36.[6] Califf ME, Mooney RJ. Relationallearning of pattern-match rules forinformation extraction. Working notes of AAAI spring symposium onapplying machine learning to discourse processing 1998:6–11.[7] Hu ZZ, Narayanaswamy M, Ravikumar KE, Vijay-Shanker K, Wu CH. Literaturemining and database annotation of protein phosphorylation using a rule-basedsystem. Bioinformatics 2005;21(11):2759–65.[8] Jimeno A, Jimenez-Ruiz E, Lee V, Gaudan S, Berlanga R, Rebholz-Schuhmann D.Assessment of disease named entity recognition on a corpus of annotatedsentences. BMC Bioinformatics 2008;9(Suppl. 3):S3.[9] Hou WJ, Chen HH. Enhancing performance of protein and gene nameJ Biomed Informrecognizers with filtering and integration strategies.2004;37(6):448–60.[10] Schuemie MJ, Mons B, Weeber M, Kors JA. Evaluation of techniques forin a dictionary approach to gene and protein nameincreasing recallidentification. J Biomed Inform 2007;40(3):316–24.[11] Tsuruoka Y, TsujiiImproving the performance of dictionary-basedapproaches in protein name recognition. J Biomed Inform 2004;37(6):461–70.[12] Saric J, Jensen LJ, Ouzounova R, Rojas I, Bork P. Extraction of regulatory gene/J.protein networks from Medline. Bioinformatics 2006;22(6):645.[17] Burns GA, Khan AM, Ghandeharizadeh S, O’Neill MA, Chen YS. Tools andapproaches for the construction of knowledge models from the neuroscientificliterature. Neuroinformatics 2003;1(1):81–109.[18] Kotter R. Online retrieval, processing, and visualization of primate connectivitydata from the CoCoMac database. Neuroinformatics 2004;2(2):127–44.[19] Srinivas PR, Gusfield D, Mason O, Gertz M, Hogarth M, Stone J, et al.twoterm generationNeuroanatomicalterminologies. Neuroinformatics 2003;1(2):177–92.comparisonbetweenand[20] Talos IF, Rubin DL, Halle M, Musen M, Kikinis R. A prototype symbolic model ofcanonical functional neuroanatomy of the motor system. J Biomed Inform2008;41(2):251–63.[21] NeuroScholar. Available from: http://www.neuroscholar.org/.[22] Burns G, Hovy E. The NeuroScholar system as a natural language processingplatform for the neuroscience literature. Washington, DC: The Society forNeuroscience Annual Meeting; 2006.[23] Burns G, Feng D, Ingulfsen T, Hovy E. Infrastructure for annotation-driveninformation extraction from the primary scientific literature: principles andpractice. Services on 2007 IEEE Congress; 2007. p. 122–9.[24] Nielsen FA, Hansen LK, Balslev D. Mining for associations between text andbrain activation in a functional neuroimaging database. Neuroinformatics2004;2(4):369–80.[25] FoundationalModelofAnatomy.Availablefrom:http://fma.biostr.washington.edu.Available[26] NeuroNames.indexabout.html.from:http://braininfo.rprc.washington.edu/[27] Bowden DM, Martin RF. NeuroNames brain hierarchy. Neuroimage1995;2(1):63–83.[28] Bodenreider O. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating2004;32(DatabaseNucleicterminology.AcidsResbiomedicalissue):D267–70.[13] Domedel-Puig N, Wernisch L. Applying GIFT, a gene interactions finder in text,[29] Zhang L, Perl Y, Halper M, Geller J, Hripcsak G. A lexical metaschema for theto fly literature. Bioinformatics 2005;21(17):3582–3.UMLS semantic network. Artif Intell Med 2005;33(1):41–59.[14] Liu Y, Navathe SB, Civera J, Dasigi V, Ram A, Ciliax BJ, et al. Text miningabiomedicalcomparative study of algorithms. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform2005;2(1):62–76.for discoveringrelationships:gene-to-geneliterature[15] Rinaldi F, Schneider G, Kaljurand K, Hess M, Andronis C, Konstandi O, et al.Mining of relations between proteins over biomedical scientific literatureusing a deep-linguistic approach. Artif Intell Med 2007;39(2):127–36.[16] Crasto CJ, Marenco LN, Migliore M, Mao B, Nadkarni PM, Miller P, et al. Textmining neuroscience journal articles to populate neuroscience databases.Neuroinformatics 2003;1(3):215–37.[30] Brill E. A simple rule-based part of speech tagger. In: Proceedings of the thirdconference on applied natural language processing. Trento, Italy; 1992.[31] Heja G, Surjan G. Using n-gram method in the decomposition of compoundmedical diagnoses. Int J Med Inform 2003;70(2–3):229–36.[32] Efron B, Tibshirani R. Bootstrap methods for standard errors, confidenceintervals, and other measures of statistical accuracy. Stat Sci 1986;1(1):54–77.[33] Solso RL, MacLin OH, MacLin MK. Cognitive psychology. 8th ed. Boston: Allynand Bacon; 2007.[34] Kolb B, Whishaw IQ. Fundamentals of human neuropsychology. 5th ed. NewYork: Worth Publishers; 2003.