Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160www.elsevier.com/locate/artintWhy Heideggerian AI failed and how fixing it would require makingit more Heideggerian ✩Hubert L. DreyfusUniversity of California, Department of Philosophy, 314 Moses Hall 2390, Berkeley, CA 94720-2390, USAAvailable online 10 October 20071. The convergence of computers and philosophyWhen I was teaching at MIT in the early sixties, students from the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory would cometo my Heidegger course and say in effect: “You philosophers have been reflecting in your armchairs for over 2000years and you still don’t understand how the mind works. We in the AI Lab have taken over and are succeeding whereyou philosophers have failed. We are now programming computers to exhibit human intelligence: to solve problems,to understand natural language, to perceive, and to learn.”1 In 1968 Marvin Minsky, head of the AI lab, proclaimed:“Within a generation we will have intelligent computers like HAL in the film, 2001.”2As luck would have it, in 1963, I was invited by the RAND Corporation to evaluate the pioneering work of AlanNewell and Herbert Simon in a new field called Cognitive Simulation (CS). Newell and Simon claimed that bothdigital computers and the human mind could be understood as physical symbol systems, using strings of bits or streamsof neuron pulses as symbols representing the external world. Intelligence, they claimed, merely required making theappropriate inferences from these internal representations. As they put it: “A physical symbol system has the necessaryand sufficient means for general intelligent action.”3As I studied the RAND papers and memos, I found to my surprise that, far from replacing philosophy, the pio-neers in CS had learned a lot, directly and indirectly from the philosophers. They had taken over Hobbes’ claim thatreasoning was calculating, Descartes’ mental representations, Leibniz’s idea of a “universal characteristic”—a set ofprimitives in which all knowledge could be expressed,—Kant’s claim that concepts were rules, Frege’s formalizationof such rules, and Russell’s postulation of logical atoms as the building blocks of reality. In short, without realizing it,AI researchers were hard at work turning rationalist philosophy into a research program.At the same time, I began to suspect that the critical insights formulated in existentialist armchairs, especiallyHeidegger’s and Merleau-Ponty’s, were bad news for those working in AI laboratories—that, by combining rational-✩ The essence of this article will appear in the book “The Mechanization of Mind in History”, MIT Press.E-mail address: dreyfus@cogsci.berkeley.edu.1 This isn’t just my impression. Philip Agre, a PhD student at the AI Lab at that time, later wrote:I have heard expressed many versions of the propositions . . . that philosophy is a matter of mere thinking whereas technology is a matter of realdoing, and that philosophy consequently can be understood only as deficient.Philip E. Agre, Computation and Human Experience (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 239.2 Marvin Minsky as quoted in a 1968 MGM press release for Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey.3 Newell, A. and Simon, H.A., Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry: Symbols and Search, Mind Design, John Haugeland, Edt. (Cambridge,MA, MIT Press), 1988.0004-3702/$ – see front matter © 2007 Published by Elsevier B.V.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2007.10.0121138H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160ism, representationalism, conceptualism, formalism, and logical atomism into a research program, AI researchers hadcondemned their enterprise to reenact a failure.2. Symbolic AI as a degenerating research programUsing Heidegger as a guide, I began to look for signs that the whole AI research program was degenerating.I was particularly struck by the fact that, among other troubles, researchers were running up against the problem ofrepresenting significance and relevance—a problem that Heidegger saw was implicit in Descartes’ understanding ofthe world as a set of meaningless facts to which the mind assigned what Descartes called values, and John Searle nowcalls functions.4But, Heidegger warned, values are just more meaningless facts. To say a hammer has the function of being for ham-mering leaves out the defining relation of hammers to nails and other equipment, to the point of building things, and tothe skills required when actually using the hammer—all of which reveal the way of being of the hammer which Hei-degger called readiness-to-hand. Merely assigning formal function predicates to brute facts such as hammers couldn’tcapture the hammer’s way of being nor the meaningful organization of the everyday world in which hammering hasits place. “[B]y taking refuge in ‘value’-characteristics,” Heidegger said, “we are . . . far from even catching a glimpseof being as readiness-to-hand.”5Minsky, unaware of Heidegger’s critique, was convinced that representing a few million facts about objects in-cluding their functions, would solve what had come to be called the commonsense knowledge problem. It seemed tome, however, that the deep problem wasn’t storing millions of facts; it was knowing which facts were relevant in anygiven situation. One version of this relevance problem was called “the frame problem.” If the computer is running arepresentation of the current state of the world and something in the world changes, how does the program determinewhich of its represented facts can be assumed to have stayed the same, and which would have to be updated?As Michael Wheeler in his recent book, Reconstructing the Cognitive World, puts it:[G]iven a dynamically changing world, how is a nonmagical system . . . to take account of those state changes inthat world . . . that matter, and those unchanged states in that world that matter, while ignoring those that do not?And how is that system to retrieve and (if necessary) to revise, out of all the beliefs that it possesses, just thosebeliefs that are relevant in some particular context of action?6Minsky suggested that, to avoid the frame problem, AI programmers could use what he called frames—descriptionsof typical situations like going to a birthday party—to list and organize those, and only those, facts that were normallyrelevant. Perhaps influenced by a computer science student who had taken my phenomenology course, Minsky sug-gested a structure of essential features and default assignments—a structure Husserl had already proposed and alreadycalled a frame.7But a system of frames isn’t in a situation, so in order to select the possibly relevant facts in the current situationone would need frames for recognizing situations like birthday parties, and for telling them from other situations suchas ordering in a restaurant. But how, I wondered, could the computer select from the supposed millions of frames inits memory the relevant frame for selecting the birthday party frame as the relevant frame, so as to see the currentrelevance of, say, an exchange of gifts rather than money? It seemed to me obvious that any AI program using framesto organize millions of meaningless facts so as to retrieve the currently relevant ones was going to be caught in a4 John R. Searle, The Construction of Social Reality (New York: The Free Press, 1995).5 Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans. (New York: Harper & Row, 1962), 132–133.6 Michael Wheeler, Reconstructing the Cognitive World: The Next Step (Cambridge, MA: A Bradford Book, The MIT Press, 2007), 179.7 Edmund Husserl, Experience and Judgment (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973), 38.To do the same job, Roger Schank proposed what he called scripts such as a restaurant script. “A script,” he wrote, “is a structure that describesappropriate sequences of events in a particular context. A script is made up of slots and requirements about what can fill those slots. The structureis an interconnected whole, and what is in one slot affects what can be in another. A script is a predetermined, stereotyped sequence of actionsthat defines a well-known situation.” R.C. Schank and R.P. Abelson, Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: An Inquiry into Human KnowledgeStructures (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1977) 41. Quoted in: Views into the Chinese Room: New Essays on Searle and Artificial Intelligence,John Preston and Mark Bishop, Eds (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002).H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601139regress of frames for recognizing relevant frames for recognizing relevant facts, and that, therefore, the frame problemwasn’t just a problem but was a sign that something was seriously wrong with the whole approach.Unfortunately, what has always distinguished AI research from a science is its refusal to face up to and learn fromits failures. In the case of the relevance problem, the AI programmers at MIT in the sixties and early seventies limitedtheir programs to what they called micro-worlds—artificial situations in which the small number of features that werepossibly relevant was determined beforehand. Since this approach obviously avoided the real-world frame problem,MIT PhD students were compelled to claim in their theses that their micro-worlds could be made more realistic, andthat the techniques they introduced could be generalized to cover commonsense knowledge. There were, however, nosuccessful follow-ups.8The work of Terry Winograd is the best of the work done during the micro-world period. His “blocks-world”program, SHRDLU, responded to commands in ordinary English instructing a virtual robot arm to move blocksdisplayed on a computer screen. It was the parade case of a micro-world program that really worked—but of courseonly in its micro-world. So to produce the expected generalization of his techniques, Winograd started working on anew Knowledge Representation Language, (KRL). His group, he said, was “concerned with developing a formalism,or ‘representation,’ with which to describe . . . knowledge.” And he added: “We seek the ‘atoms’ and ‘particles’ ofwhich it is built, and the ‘forces’ that act on it.”9But this approach wasn’t working. Indeed, Minsky has recently acknowledged in Wired Magazine that AI has beenbrain dead since the early 70ies when it encountered the problem of commonsense knowledge.10 Winograd, however,unlike his colleagues, was scientific enough to try to figure out what had gone wrong. So in the mid 70ies we beganhaving weekly lunches to discuss his problems in a broader philosophical context. Looking back, Winograd says: “Myown work in computer science is greatly influenced by conversations with Dreyfus.”11After a year of such conversations, and after reading the relevant texts of the existential phenomenologists, Wino-grad abandoned work on KRL and began including Heidegger in his Computer Science courses at Stanford. In sodoing, he became the first high-profile deserter from what was, indeed, becoming a degenerating research program.John Haugeland now refers to the symbolic AI of that period as Good Old Fashioned AI—GOFAI for short—and thatname has been widely accepted as capturing its current status. Indeed, Michael Wheeler argues that a new paradigmis already taking shape. He maintains:[A] Heideggerian cognitive science is . . . emerging right now, in the laboratories and offices around the worldwhere embodied-embedded thinking is under active investigation and development.12Wheeler’s well informed book could not have been more timely since there are now at least three versions ofsupposedly Heideggerian AI that might be thought of as articulating a new paradigm for the field: Rodney Brooks’behaviorist approach at MIT, Phil Agre’s pragmatist model, and Walter Freeman’s neurodynamic model. All threeapproaches implicitly accept Heidegger’s critique of Cartesian internalist representations, and, embrace John Hauge-land’s slogan that cognition is embedded and embodied.138 After I published, What Computers Can’t Do in 1972 and pointed out this difficulty among many others, my MIT computer colleagues, ratherthan facing my criticism, tried to keep me from getting tenure on the grounds that my affiliation with MIT would give undeserved credibility to my“fallacies,” and so would prevent the AI Lab from continuing to receive research grants from the Defense Department.The AI researchers were right to worry. I was considering hiring an actor to impersonate an officer from DARPA having lunch with me at theMIT Faculty Club. (A plan cut short when Jerry Wiesner, the President of MIT, after consulting with Harvard and Russian computer scientists, andreading my book himself, personally granted me tenure.) I did, however, later get called to Washington by DARPA to give my views, and the AILab did loose DARPA support during what has come to be called the AI Winter.9 Winograd, T. (1976). Artificial Intelligence and Language Comprehension, in Artificial Intelligence and Language Comprehension, Washington,D.C.: National Institute of Education, 9.10 Wired Magazine, Issue 11:08, August 2003.11 Heidegger, Coping, and Cognitive Science, Essays in Honor of Hubert L. Dreyfus, Vol. 2, Mark Wrathall Ed. (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,2000), iii.12 Michael Wheeler, Reconstructing the Cognitive World, 285.13 John Haugeland, “Mind embodied and embedded,” Having Thought: Essays in the Metaphysics of Mind (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UniversityPress, 1998), 218.1140H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11603. Heideggerian AI, stage one: Eliminating representations by building behavior-based robotsWinograd sums up what happened at MIT after he left for Stanford:For those who have followed the history of artificial intelligence, it is ironic that [the MIT] laboratory shouldbecome a cradle of “Heideggerian AI.” It was at MIT that Dreyfus first formulated his critique, and, for twentyyears, the intellectual atmosphere in the AI Lab was overtly hostile to recognizing the implications of what he said.Nevertheless, some of the work now being done at that laboratory seems to have been affected by Heidegger andDreyfus.14Here’s how it happened. In March 1986, the MIT AI Lab under its new director, Patrick Winston, reversed Minsky’sattitude toward me and allowed, if not encouraged, several graduate students, led by Phil Agre and John Batali, to inviteme to give a talk.15 I called the talk, “Why AI Researchers should study Being and Time.” In my talk I repeated what Ihad written in 1972 in What Computers Can’t Do: “[T] he meaningful objects . . . among which we live are not a modelof the world stored in our mind or brain; they are the world itself.”16 And I quoted approvingly a Stanford ResearchInstitute report that, “It turned out to be very difficult to reproduce in an internal representation for a computer thenecessary richness of environment that would give rise to interesting behavior by a highly adaptive robot,”17 andconcluded that “this problem is avoided by human beings because their model of the world is the world itself.”18The year of my talk, Rodney Brooks, who had moved from Stanford to MIT, published a paper criticizing theGOFAI robots that used representations of the world and problem solving techniques to plan their movements. Hereported that, based on the idea that “the best model of the world is the world itself,” he had “developed a differentapproach in which a mobile robot uses the world itself as its own representation—continually referring to its sensorsrather than to an internal world model.”19 Looking back at the frame problem, he writes:And why could my simulated robot handle it? Because it was using the world as its own model. It never referredto an internal description of the world that would quickly get out of date if anything in the real world moved.20Brooks’s approach is an important advance, but Brooks’s robots respond only to fixed isolable features of theenvironment, not to context or changing significance. Moreover, they do not learn. They are like ants, and Brooks14 Terry Winograd, “Heidegger and he Design of Computer Systems,” talk delivered at Applied Heidegger Conference, Berkeley, CA, Sept. 1989.Cited in H. Dreyfus, What Computers Still Can’t Do, Introduction to the MIT Press edition, xxxi.15 Not everyone was pleased. One of the graduate students responsible for the invitation reported to me: “After it was announced that you weregiving the talk, Marvin Minsky came into my office and shouted at me for 10 minutes or so for inviting you.”16 Hubert Dreyfus, What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of Artificial Reason. MIT Press, 1992, 265–266.17 Ibid, 300.18 Ibid.19 Rodney A. Brooks. “Intelligence without Representation,” Mind Design, John Haugeland, Ed. (The MIT Press, 1988), 416. (Brooks’s paperwas published in 1986.) Haugeland explains Brooks’s breakthrough using as an example Brooks’s robot, Herbert:Brooks uses what he calls “subsumption architecture”, according to which systems are decomposed not in the familiar way by local functionsor faculties, but rather by global activities or tasks. . . . Thus, Herbert has one subsystem for detecting and avoiding obstacles in its path, anotherfor wandering around, a third for finding distant soda cans and homing in on them, a fourth for noticing nearby soda cans and putting its handaround them, a fifth for detecting something between its fingers and closing them, and so on. . . fourteen in all. What’s striking is that these areall complete input/output systems, more or less independent of each other. (John Haugeland, Having Thought: Essays in the Metaphysics ofMind (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998), 218.)20 Brooks gives me credit for “being right about many issues such as the way in which people operate in the world is intimately coupled to theexistence of their body,” (Ibid. 42.) but he denies the direct influence of Heidegger:In some circles, much credence is given to Heidegger as one who understood the dynamics of existence. Our approach has certain similaritiesto work inspired by this German philosopher (for instance, Agre and Chapman 1987) but our work was not so inspired. It is based purely onengineering considerations. (“Intelligence without Representation,” 415). [Rodney A. Brooks, Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will ChangeUs, Vintage Books (2002), 168.]H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601141aptly calls them “animats.” Brooks thinks he does not need to worry about learning, putting it off as a concern forpossible future research.21 But by operating in a fixed world and responding only to the small set of possibly relevantfeatures that their receptors can pick up, Brooks’ animats beg the question of changing relevance and so finesse ratherthan solve the frame problem.Still, Brooks comes close to an existential insight spelled out by Merleau-Ponty, viz. that intelligence is foundedon and presupposes the more basic way of coping we share with animals, when he says:22The “simple” things concerning perception and mobility in a dynamic environment . . . are a necessary basis for“higher-level” intellect. . . . Therefore, I proposed looking at simpler animals as a bottom-up model for buildingintelligence. It is soon apparent, when “reasoning” is stripped away as the prime component of a robot’s intellect,that the dynamics of the interaction of the robot and its environment are primary determinants of the structure ofits intelligence.23Brooks is realistic in describing his ambitions and his successes:The work can best be described as attempts to emulate insect-level locomotion and navigation. . . . There have beensome behavior-based attempts at exploring social interactions, but these too have been modeled after the sorts ofsocial interactions we see in insects.24Surprisingly, the modesty Brooks exhibited in choosing to first construct simple insect-like devices did not deterBrooks and Daniel Dennett from repeating the extravagant optimism characteristic of AI researchers in the sixties.As in the days of GOFAI, on the basis of Brooks’ success with insect-like devices, instead of trying to make, say, anartificial spider, Brooks and Dennett decided to leap ahead and build a humanoid robot. As Dennett explained in a1994 report to The Royal Society of London:A team at MIT of which I am a part is now embarking on a long-term project to design and build a humanoidrobot, Cog, whose cognitive talents will include speech, eye-coordinated manipulation of objects, and a host ofself-protective, self-regulatory and self-exploring activities.25Dennett seems to reduce this project to a joke when he adds in all seriousness: “While we are at it, we might as welltry to make Cog crave human praise and company and even exhibit a sense of humor.”26Of course, the “long term project” was short lived. Cog failed to achieve any of its goals and the original robotis already in a museum.27 But, as far as I know, neither Dennett nor anyone connected with the project has pub-lished an account of the failure and asked what mistaken assumptions underlay their absurd optimism. In a personalcommunication Dennett blamed the failure on a lack of graduate students and claimed that:Progress was being made on all the goals, but slower than had been anticipated.28If progress was actually being made, however, the graduate students wouldn’t have left, or others would havecontinued to work on the project. Clearly some specific assumptions must have been mistaken, but all we find inDennett’s assessment is the implicit assumption that human intelligence is on a continuum with insect intelligence,21 “Can higher-level functions such as learning occur in these fixed topology networks of simple finite state machines?” he asks. But he offers noresponse. (“Intelligence without Representation,” Mind Design, 420.)22 See, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, The Structure of Behavior, A.L. Fisher, Trans. (Boston: Beacon Press, 2nd edition 1966).23 Brooks, “Intelligence without representation”, 418.24 Brooks, From earwigs to humans, Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 20, 1997, 291.25 Daniel Dennett, The practical requirements for making a conscious robot, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, A, v. 349,1994, 133–146.26 Ibid. 133.27 Although, as of going to press in 2007, you couldn’t tell it from the Cog web page. (www.ai.mit.edu/projects/humanoid-robotics-group/cog/.)28 Private communication. Oct. 26, 2005.1142H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160and that therefore adding a bit of complexity to what has already been done with animats counts as progress towardhumanoid intelligence. At the beginning of AI research, Yehoshua Bar-Hillel called this way of thinking the first-stepfallacy, and my brother at RAND quipped, “It’s like claiming that the first monkey that climbed a tree was makingprogress towards flight to the moon.”In contrast to Dennett’s assessment, Brooks is prepared to entertain the possibility that he is barking up the wrongtree. He soberly comments that:Perhaps there is a way of looking at biological systems that will illuminate an inherent necessity in some aspect ofthe interactions of their parts that is completely missing from our artificial systems . . . . I am not suggesting thatwe need go outside the current realms of mathematics, physics, chemistry, or biochemistry. Rather I am suggestingthat perhaps at this point we simply do not get it, and that there is some fundamental change necessary in ourthinking in order that we might build artificial systems that have the levels of intelligence, emotional interactions,long term stability and autonomy, and general robustness that we might expect of biological systems.29We can already see that Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty would say that, in spite of the breakthrough of giving upinternal symbolic representations, Brooks, indeed, doesn’t get it—that what AI researchers have to face and understandis not only why our everyday coping couldn’t be understood in terms of inferences from symbolic representations,as Minsky’s intellectualist approach assumed, but also why it can’t be understood in terms of responses caused byfixed features of the environment, as in Brooks’ empiricist model. AI researchers need to consider the possibilitythat embodied beings like us take as input energy from the physical universe, and respond in such a way as to openthemselves to a world organized in terms of their needs, interests, and bodily capacities without their minds needingto impose meaning on a meaningless given, as Minsky’s frames require, nor their brains converting stimulus inputinto reflex responses, as in Brooks’s animats.Later I’ll suggest that Walter Freeman’s neurodynamics offers a radically new basis for a Heideggerian approachto human intelligence—an approach compatible with physics and grounded in the neuroscience of perception andaction. But first we need to examine another approach to AI contemporaneous with Brooks’ that actually calls itselfHeideggerian.4. Heideggerian AI, stage 2: Programming the ready-to-handIn my talk at the MIT AI Lab, I introduced Heidegger’s non-representational account of the absorption of Dasein(human being) in the world. I also explained that Heidegger distinguished two modes of being: the readiness-to-handof equipment when we are involved in using it, and the presence-at-hand of objects when we contemplate them. Outof that explanation and the lively discussion that followed, grew the second type of Heideggerian AI—the first toacknowledge its lineage.This new approach took the form of Phil Agre’s and David Chapman’s program, Pengi, which guided a virtualagent playing a computer game called Pengo, in which the player and penguins kick large and deadly blocks of iceat each other.30 Their approach, which they called “interactionism,” was more self-consciously Heideggerian thanBrooks’s, in that they attempted to capture what Agre called “Heidegger’s account of everyday routine activities.”31In his book, Computation and Human Experience, Agre takes up where my talk left off:I believe that people are intimately involved in the world around them and that the epistemological isolation thatDescartes took for granted is untenable. This position has been argued at great length by philosophers such asHeidegger and Merleau-Ponty; I wish to argue it technologically.3229 Brooks, From earwigs to humans, 301. (The missing idea may well be Walter Freeman’s. See below.)30 Philip E. Agre, The Dynamic Structure of Everyday Life, MIT AI Technical Report 1085, October 1988, chapter 1, Section A1a, 9.31 Agre, Computation and Human Experience, 243. His ambitious goal was to “develop an alternative to the representational theory of intention-ality, beginning with the phenomenological intuition that everyday routine activities are founded in habitual, embodied ways of interacting withpeople, places, and things in he world.”32 Ibid, xi.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601143Agre’s interesting new idea is that the world of Pengo in which the Pengi agent acts is made up, not of present-at-hand objects with properties, but of possibilities for action that trigger appropriate responses from the agent. Toprogram this situated approach, Agre used what he called “deictic representations.” He tells us:This proposal is based on a rough analogy with Heidegger’s analysis of everyday intentionality in Division Iof Being and Time, with objective intentionality corresponding to the present-at-hand and deictic intentionalitycorresponding to the ready-to-hand.33And he explains:[Deictic representations] designate, not a particular object in the world, but rather a role that an object might playin a certain time-extended pattern of interaction between an agent and its environment.34Looking back on my talk at MIT and rereading Agre’s book I now see that, in a way, Agre understood Heidegger’saccount of readiness-to-hand better than I did at the time. I thought of the ready-to-hand as a special class of entities,viz. equipment, whereas the Pengi program treats what the agent responds to purely as functions. For Heidegger andAgre the ready-to-hand is not a what but a for-what.35 But not just that the hammer is for hammering. As Agresaw, Heidegger wants to get at something more basic than simply a class of objects defined by their use. At his bestHeidegger would, I think, deny that a hammer in a drawer has readiness-to-hand as its way of being. Rather, he seesthat, for the user, equipment is encountered as a solicitation to act, not an entity with a function feature. He notesthat: “When one is wholly devoted to something and ‘really’ busies oneself with it, one does not do so just alongsidethe work itself, or alongside the tool, or alongside both of them ‘together’.”36 And he adds: “the peculiarity of whatis proximally ready-to-hand is that, in its readiness-to-hand, it must, as it were, withdraw in order to be ready-to-handquite authentically.”37As usual with Heidegger, we must ask: What is the phenomenon he is pointing out? In this case he wants us tosee that, to observe our hammer or to observe ourselves hammering undermines our skillful coping. We can anddo observe our surroundings while we cope, and sometimes, if we are learning, monitoring our performance as welearn improves our performance in the long run, but in the short run such attention interferes with our performance.For example, while biking we can observe passers by, or think about philosophy, but if we start observing how weskillfully stay balanced, we risk falling over.Heidegger struggles to describe the basic way we are drawn in by the ready-to-hand. The Gestaltists would latertalk of “solicitations.” In Phenomenology of Perception Merleau-Ponty speaks of “motivations” and later, of “theflesh.” All these terms point at what is not objectifyable—a situation’s way of directly drawing from one a responsethat is neither caused like a reflex, nor done for a reason.33 Ibid. 332.34 Ibid. 251. As Beth Preston sums it up in her paper, “Heidegger and Artificial Intelligence:” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (1),March 1993: 43–69:What results is a system that represents the world not as a set of objects with properties, but as current functions (what Heidegger calledin-order-tos). Thus, to take a Heideggerian example, I experience a hammer I am using not as an object with properties but as an in-order-to-drive-in-this-nail.35 Heidegger himself is not always clear about the status of the ready-to-hand. When he is stressing the holism of equipmental relations, he thinksof the ready-to-hand as equipment, and of equipment as things like lamps, tables, doors, and rooms that have a place in a whole nexus of otherequipment. Furthermore, he holds that breakdown reveals that these interdefined pieces of equipment are made of present-at-hand stuff that wasthere all along. (Being and Time, 97.) At one point Heidegger even goes so far as to include the ready-to-hand under the categories that characterizethe present-at-hand:We call ‘categories’—characteristics of being for entities whose character is not that of Dasein. . . . Any entity is either a “who” (existence) ora what (present-at-hand in the broadest sense.) Being and Time 70.36 Heidegger, Being and Time, 405.37 Ibid. 99.1144H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160In his 1925 course, Logic: The Question of Truth Heidegger describes our most basic experience of what he latercalls “pressing into possibilities” not as dealing with the desk, the door, the lamp, the chair and so forth, but as directlyresponding to a “what for”:What is first of all ‘given’ . . . is the ‘for writing,’ the ‘for going in and out,’ the ‘for illuminating,’ the ‘for sitting.’That is, writing, going-in-and-out, sitting, and the like are what we are a priori involved with. What we know whenwe ‘know our way around’ and what we learn are these ‘for-what’s.’38It’s clear here that, in spite of what some interpreters take Heidegger to be suggesting in Being and Time, this basicexperience has no as-structure.39 That is, when absorbed in coping, I can be described objectively as using a certaindoor as a door, but I’m not experiencing the door as a door. Normally there is no “I” and no experiencing of the doorat all but simply pressing into the possibility of going out. The important thing to realize is that, when we are pressinginto possibilities, there is no experience of an entity doing the soliciting; just the immediate response to a solicitation.(When solicitations don’t pan out, what then is disclosed is the world of interconnected equipment, and I can then stepback and perceive things as things, and act for reasons.40)But Agre’s Heideggerian AI did not try to program this experiential aspect of being drawn in by a solicitation.Rather, with his deictic representations, Agre objectified both the functions and their situational relevance for theagent. In Pengi, when a virtual ice cube defined by its function is close to the virtual player, a rule dictates a response,e.g. kick it. No skill is involved and no learning takes place.So Agre had something right that I was missing—the transparency of the ready-to-hand—but he nonetheless fellshort of programming a Heideggerian account of everyday routine activities. For Heidegger, the ready-to-hand is not afixed function, encountered in a predefined type of situation that triggers a predetermined response that either succeedsor fails. Rather, as we have begun to see and will soon see further, readiness-to-hand is experienced as a solicitationthat calls forth a flexible response to the significance of the current situation—a response which is experienced aseither improving one’s situation or making it worse.Moreover, although he proposed to program Heidegger’s account of everyday routine activities, Agre doesn’t eventry to account for how our experience feeds back and changes our sense of the significance of the next situation andwhat is relevant in it. In putting his virtual agent in a virtual micro-world where all possibly relevance is determinedbeforehand, Agre didn’t try to account for how we learn to respond to new relevancies, and so, like Brooks, he finessesrather than solves the frame problem.Merleau-Ponty’s work, on the contrary, offers a nonrepresentational account of the way the body and the worldare coupled that suggests a way of avoiding the frame problem. According to Merleau-Ponty, as an agent acquiresskills, those skills are “stored,” not as representations in the agent’s mind, but as the solicitations of situations in theworld. What the learner acquires through experience is not represented at all but is presented to the learner as moreand more finely discriminated situations. If the situation does not clearly solicit a single response or if the responsedoes not produce a satisfactory result, the learner is led to further refine his discriminations, which, in turn, solicit evermore refined responses. For example, what we have learned from our experience of finding our way around in a cityis “sedimented” in how that city looks to us. Merleau-Ponty calls this feedback loop between the embodied coper and38 Heidegger, Logic: The Question of Truth, Trans. Thomas Sheehan manuscript. Gesamtausgabe, Band 21, 144. 2008.39 Heidegger goes on immediately to contrast the total absorption of coping he has just described with the as-structure of thematic observation:Every act of having things in front of oneself and perceiving them is held within [the] disclosure of those things, a disclosure that things getfrom a primary meaningfulnesss in terms of the what-for. Every act of having something in front of oneself and perceiving it is, in and for itself,a ‘having’ something as something.To put it in terms of Being and Time, the as-structure of equipment goes all the way down in the world, but not in the way the world shows up inour absorbed coping. It is poor phenomenology to read the self and the as-structure into our experience when we are coping at our best.40 There is a third possible attitude. Heidegger calls it responding to signs. Then I am sensitive to possibly relevant aspects of my environment andtake them into account as I cope. We normally do this when driving in traffic, and the master potter, for example, is alert to the way the pot she ismaking may be deviating from the normal.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601145the perceptual world the intentional arc. He says: “Cognitive life, the life of desire or perceptual life—is subtendedby an ‘intentional arc’ which projects round about us our past, our future, [and] our human setting.”415. Pseudo Heideggerian AI: Embedded, embodied, extended mindAs if taking up from where Agre left off with his objectified version of the ready-to-hand, in Reconstructing theCognitive World Wheeler tells us:[O]ur global project requires a defense of action-oriented representation. . . . [A]ction-oriented representation maybe interpreted as the subagential reflection of online practical problem solving, as conceived by the Heideggerianphenomenologist. Embodied-embedded cognitive science is implicitly a Heideggerian venture.42He further notes:As part of its promise, this nascent, Heideggerian paradigm would need to indicate that it might plausibly be ableeither to solve or to dissolve the frame problem.43And he suggests:The good news for the reoriented Heideggerian is that the kind of evidence called for here may already exist, in thework of recent embodied-embedded cognitive science.44He concludes:Dreyfus is right that the philosophical impasse between a Cartesian and a Heideggerian metaphysics can be resolvedempirically via cognitive science. However, he looks for resolution in the wrong place. For it is not any allegedempirical failure on the part of orthodox cognitive science, but rather the concrete empirical success of a cognitivescience with Heideggerian credentials, that, if sustained and deepened, would ultimately vindicate a Heideggerianposition in cognitive theory.45I agree that it is time for a positive account of Heideggerian AI and of an underlying Heideggerian neuroscience, butI think Wheeler is the one looking in the wrong place. Merely by supposing that Heidegger is concerned with problemsolving and action oriented representations, Wheeler’s project reflects not a step beyond Agre but a regression to as-pects of pre-Brooks GOFAI. Heidegger, indeed, claims that skillful coping is basic, but he is also clear that, all copingtakes place on the background coping he calls being-in-the-world that doesn’t involve any form of representation atall.46Wheeler’s cognitivist misreading of Heidegger leads him to overestimate the importance of Andy Clark’s and DavidChalmers’ attempt to free us from the Cartesian idea that the mind is essentially inner by pointing out that in thinkingwe sometimes make use of external artifacts like pencil, paper, and computers.47 Unfortunately, this argument for theextended mind preserves the Cartesian assumption that our basic way of relating to the world is by using propositionalrepresentations such as beliefs and memories whether they are in the mind or in notebooks in the world. In effect,41 Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith (Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962), 136.42 Wheeler, Reconstructing the Cognitive World, 222–223.43 Ibid. 187.44 Ibid. 188.45 Ibid. 188–189.46 Merleau-Ponty says the same:[T]o move one’s body is to aim at things through it; it is to allow oneself to respond to their call, which is made upon it independently of anyrepresentation. (Phenomenology of Perception, 139.)47 See, Clark, A. and Chalmers, D., “The extended mind,” Analysis 58 (1): 7–19, 199.1146H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160while Brooks happily dispenses with representations where coping is concerned, all Chalmers, Clark, and Wheelergive us as a supposedly radical new Heideggerian approach to the human way of being in the world is to note thatmemories and beliefs are not necessarily inner entities and that, therefore, thinking bridges the distinction betweeninner and outer representations.Heidegger’s important insight is not that, when we solve problems, we sometimes make use of representationalequipment outside our bodies, but that being-in-the-world is more basic than thinking and solving problems;that itis not representational at all. That is, when we are coping at our best, we are drawn in by solicitations and responddirectly to them, so that the distinction between us and our equipment—between inner and outer—vanishes.48 AsHeidegger sums it up:I live in the understanding of writing, illuminating, going-in-and-out, and the like. More precisely: as Dasein I am—in speaking, going, and understanding—an act of understanding dealing-with. My being in the world is nothingother than this already-operating-with-understanding in this mode of being.49Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty’s understanding of embedded embodied coping, then, is not that the mind is some-times extended into the world but rather that all such problem solving is derivative, that in our most basic way ofbeing, that is, as absorbed skillful copers, we are not minds at all but one with the world. Heidegger sticks to thephenomenon, when he makes the strange-sounding claim that, in its most basic way of being, “Dasein is its worldexistingly.”50When you stop thinking that mind is what characterizes us most basically but, rather, that most basically we areabsorbed copers, the inner/outer distinction becomes problematic. There’s no easily askable question as to whetherthe absorbed coping is in me or in the world. According to Heidegger, intentional content isn’t in the mind, nor insome third realm (as it is for Husserl), nor in the world; it isn’t anywhere. It’s an embodied way of being-towards.Thus for a Heideggerian, all forms of cognitivist externalism presuppose a more basic existential externalism whereeven to speak of “externalism” is misleading since such talk presupposes a contrast with the internal. Compared tothis genuinely Heideggerian view, extended-mind externalism is contrived, trivial, and irrelevant.6. What motivates embedded/embodied coping?But why is Dasein called to cope at all? According to Heidegger, we are constantly solicited to improve ourfamiliarity with the world. Five years before the publication of Being and Time he wrote:Caring takes the form of a looking around and seeing, and as this circumspective caring it is at the same time. . . concerned about developing its circumspection, that is, about securing and expanding its familiarity with theobjects of its dealings.5148 As Heidegger puts it: “The self must forget itself if, lost in the world of equipment, it is to be able ‘actually’ to go to work and manipulatesomething.” Being and Time, 405.49 Heidegger, Logic, 146. It’s important to realize that when he uses the term “understanding,” Heidegger explains (with a little help from thetranslator) that he means a kind of know-how:In German we say that someone can vorstehen something—literally, stand in front of or ahead of it, that is, stand at its head, administer,manage, preside over it. This is equivalent to saying that he versteht sich darauf, understands in the sense of being skilled or expert at it, hasthe know-how of it. (Martin Heidegger, The Basic Problems of Phenomenology, A. Hofstadter, Trans. Bloomington: Indian University Press,1982, 276.)50 Heidegger, Being and Time, 416. To make sense of this slogan, it’s important to be clear that Heidegger distinguishes the human world fromthe physical universe.51 Heidegger, Phenomenological Interpretations in Connection with Aristotle, in Supplements: From the Earliest Essays to Being and Time andBeyond, John Van Buren, Ed. (State University of New York Press, 2002), 115. My italics.This away of putting the source of significance covers both animals and people. By the time he published Being and Time, however, Heideggerwas interested exclusively in the special kind of significance found in the world opened up by human beings who are defined by the stand they takeon their own being. We might call this meaning. In this paper I’m putting the question of uniquely human meaning aside to concentrate on the sortof significance we share with animals.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601147This pragmatic perspective is developed by Merleau-Ponty, and by Samuel Todes.52 These heirs to Heidegger’saccount of familiarity and coping describe how an organism, animal or human, interacts with what is objectivelyspeaking the meaningless physical universe in such a way as to cope with an environment organized in terms of thatorganism’s need to find its way around. All such coping beings are motivated to get a more and more refined andsecure sense of the specific objects of their dealings. According to Merleau-Ponty:My body is geared into the world when my perception presents me with a spectacle as varied and as clearlyarticulated as possible. . .53In short, in our skilled activity we are drawn to move so as to achieve a better and better grip on our situation.For this movement towards maximal grip to take place one doesn’t need a mental representation of one’s goal norany problem solving, as would a GOFAI robot. Rather, acting is experienced as a steady flow of skillful activity inresponse to the situation. When one’s situation deviates from some optimal body-environment gestalt, one’s activitytakes one closer to that optimum and thereby relieves the “tension” of the deviation. One does not need to know whatthe optimum is in order to move towards it. One’s body is simply drawn to lower the tension.That is, if things are going well and I am gaining an optimal grip on the world, I simple respond to the solicitation tomove towards an even better grip and, if things are going badly, I experience a pull back towards the norm. If it seemsthat much of the time we don’t experience any such pull, Merleau-Ponty would no doubt respond that the sensitivityto deviation is nonetheless guiding one’s coping, just as an airport radio beacon doesn’t give a warning signal unlessthe plane strays off course, and then, let us suppose, the plane gets a signal whose intensity corresponds to how faroff course it is and the intensity of the signal diminishes as it approaches getting back on course. The silence thataccompanies being on course doesn’t mean the beacon isn’t continually guiding the plane. Likewise, the absence offelt tension in perception doesn’t mean we aren’t being directed by a solicitation.As Merleau-Ponty puts it: “Our body is not an object for an ‘I think’, it is a grouping of lived-through meanings thatmoves towards its equilibrium.”54 Equilibrium being Merleau-Ponty’s name for the zero gradient of steady successfulcoping. Moreover, normally, we do not arrive at equilibrium and stop there but are immediately taken over by a newsolicitation.7. Modeling situated coping as a dynamical systemDescribing the phenomenon of everyday coping as being “geared into” the world and moving towards “equilib-rium” suggests a dynamic relation between the coper and the environment. Timothy van Gelder calls this dynamicrelation between coper and environment coupling, explaining its importance as follows:The fundamental mode of interaction with the environment is not to represent it, or even to exchange inputs andoutputs with it; rather, the relation is better understood via the technical notion of coupling. . . .The post-Cartesian agent manages to cope with the world without necessarily representing it. A dynamicalapproach suggests how this might be possible by showing how the internal operation of a system interacting withan external world can be so subtle and complex as to defy description in representational terms—how, in otherwords, cognition can transcend representation.5552 See, Samuel Todes, Body and World (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2001). Todes goes beyond Merleau-Ponty in showing how our world-disclosing perceptual experience is structured by the structure of our bodies. Merleau-Ponty never tells us what our bodies are actually like and howtheir structure affects our experience. Todes points out that our body has a front/back and up/down orientation. It moves forward more easily thanbackward, and can successfully cope only with what is in front of it. He then describes how, in order to explore our surrounding world and orientourselves in it, we have to balance ourselves within a vertical field that we do not produce, be effectively directed in a circumstantial field (facingone aspect of that field rather than another), and appropriately set to respond to the specific thing we are encountering within that field. For Todes,then, perceptual receptivity is an embodied, normative, skilled accomplishment, in response to our need to orient ourselves in the world. Clearly,this kind of holistic background coping is not done for a reason.53 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, 250. (Trans. modified.)54 Ibid, 153.55 Timothy Van Gelder, Dynamics and cognition, Mind Design II, John Haugeland, Ed., A Bradford Book (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,1997), 439, 448.1148H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160Van Gelder shares with Brooks the existentialist claim that thinking such as problem solving, is grounded in a morebasic relation of body and world. As van Gelder puts it:Cognition can, in sophisticated cases, [such as breakdowns, problem solving, and abstract thought] involve repre-sentation and sequential processing; but such phenomena are best understood as emerging from a dynamicalsubstrate, rather than as constituting the basic level of cognitive performance.56This dynamical substrate is precisely the causal basis of the skillful coping first described by Heidegger and workedout in detail by Merleau-Ponty and Todes.Van Gelder importantly contrasts the rich interactive temporality of real-time on-line coupling of coper and worldwith the austere step by step temporality of thought. Wheeler helpfully explains:[W]hilst the computational architectures proposed within computational cognitive science require that inner eventshappen in the right order, and (in theory) fast enough to get a job done, there are, in general, no constraintson how long each operation within the overall cognitive process takes, or on how long the gaps between theindividual operations are. Moreover, the transition events that characterize those inner operations are not related inany systematic way to the real-time dynamics of either neural biochemical processes, non-neural bodily events, orenvironmental phenomena (dynamics which surely involve rates and rhythms).57Computation is thus paradigmatically austere:Turing machine computing is digital, deterministic, discrete, effective (in the technical sense that behavior is alwaysthe result of an algorithmically specified finite number of operations), and temporally austere (in that time isreduced to mere sequence).58Ironically, Wheeler’s highlighting the contrast between rich dynamic temporal coupling and austere computationaltemporality enables us to see clearly that his appeal to extended minds as a Heideggerian response to Cartesianismleaves out the essential temporal character of embodied embedding. Clark and Chalmers’s examples of extendedminds manipulating representations such as notes and pictures are clearly cases of temporal austerity—no rates andrhythms are involved.Wheeler is aware of this possible objection to his backing both the dynamical systems model and the extended mindapproach. He asks: “What about the apparent clash between continuous reciprocal causation and action orientatedrepresentations? On the face of it this clash is a worry for our emerging cognitive science.”59 But instead of engagingwith the incompatibility of these two opposed models of ground level intelligence, Wheeler suggests that we mustsomehow combine them and that “this question is perhaps one of the biggest of the many challenges that lie ahead.”60Wheeler, however, hopes he can combine these approaches by appealing to the account of involved problem solvingwhich Heidegger calls dealing with the unready-to-hand. Wheeler’s point is that, unlike detached problem solvingwith its general representations, the unready-to-hand requires situation-specific representations. But, as we have seen,for Heidegger all un-ready-to-hand coping takes place on the background of an even more basic nonrepresentationalholistic coping that allows copers to orient themselves in the world.Heidegger describes this background as “the background of . . . primary familiarity, which itself is not consciousand intended but is rather present in [an] unprominent way.”61 In Being and Time he speaks of “that familiarity inaccordance with which Dasein . . . ‘knows its way about’ [sich auskennt] in its public environment” (405). This copingis like the ready-to-hand in that it does not involve representations. So Heidegger says explicitly that our background56 Ibid.57 Wheeler, Change in the rules: Computers, dynamical systems, and Searle, in Views into the Chinese Room: New Essays on Searle and ArtificialIntelligence, John Preston and Mark Bishop, Eds. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002), 345.58 Ibid. 344, 345.59 Wheeler, Reconstructing the Cognitive World, 280.60 Ibid.61 Heidegger, History of the Concept of Time, Trans. T. Kisiel (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1985), 189.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601149being-in-the-world, which he also calls transcendence, does not involve representational intentionality, but, rather,makes intentionality possible:Transcendence is a fundamental determination of the ontological structure of the Dasein. . . . Intentionality isfounded in the Dasein’s transcendence and is possible solely for this reason—transcendence cannot conversely beexplained in terms of intentionality.62To be more exact, background coping is not a traditional kind of intentionality. Whereas the ready-to-hand has con-ditions of satisfaction, like hammering in the nail, background coping does not have conditions of satisfaction. Whatwould it be to succeed or fail in finding ones way around in the familiar world? The important point for Heidegger,but not for Wheeler, is that all coping, including unready-to-hand coping, takes place on the background of this basicnon-representational, holistic, absorbed, kind of intentionality, which Heidegger calls being-in-the-world.63This is not a disagreement between Wheeler and me about the relative frequency of dealing with the ready-to-handand the unready-to-hand in everyday experience. True, Wheeler emphasizes intermittent reflective activities such aslearning and practical problem solving, whereas I, like Heidegger, emphasize pervasive activities like going out thedoor, walking on the floor, turning on and off the lights, etc. The question of the relative frequency of the ready-to-handand the unready-to-hand modes of being is, Wheeler and I agree, an empirical question.64But the issue concerning the background is not an empirical question. It is an ontological question. And, as we havejust seen, Heidegger is clear that the mode of being of the world is not that of a collection of independent modulesthat define what is relevant in specific situations. It seems to me that Wheeler is on the right track, leaving modularsolutions and action oriented representations behind, when he writes:[W]here one has CRC [continuous reciprocal causation] one will have a non-modular system. Modularity is nec-essary for homuncularity and thus, on my account, necessary for representation of any kind. To the extent that thesystems underlying intelligence are characterized by CRC, they will be non-representational, and so the notion ofaction-oriented representation won’t help explain them. (Personal communication.)Wheeler directly confronts my objection when he adds:If one could generate the claim that CRC must be the norm at the subagential level from a Heideggerian analysisof the agential level, then the consequence for me would be that, to be Heideggerian, I would have to concedethat action-oriented representation will in fact do less explanatory work than I have previously implied. (Personalcorrespondence continued.)But Wheeler misses my point when he adds:However, this takes us back to the points I made above about the prevalence of unreadiness-to-hand. Action-oriented representations will underlie our engagements with the unready-to-hand. In this domain, I suggest, theeffects of CRC will be restricted. And, I think, unreadiness-to-hand is the (factual) norm. (Personal correspondencecontinued.)We just agreed, that this is not an empirical question concerning the frequency of coping with the unready-to-hand butan ontological point about the background of all modes of coping. If Wheeler wants to count himself a Heideggerian,he does, indeed, “have to concede that action-oriented representation will in fact do less explanatory work than [he]previously implied.”62 Heidegger, The Basic Problems of Phenomenology, trans. A. Hofstadter (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1982), 162.63 Moreover, the background solicitations are constantly enriched, not by adding new bits of information as Wheeler suggests, but by allowingfiner and finer discriminations that show up in the world by way of the intentional arc.64 We agree too that both these modes of encountering the things in the world are more frequent and more basic than appeal to general-purposereasoning and goal oriented planning.1150H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160Wheeler seems to be looking for a neurodynamic model of brain activity such as we will consider in a momentwhen he writes:[A]lthough there is abundant evidence that (what we are calling) continuous reciprocal causation can mediate thetransition between different phases of behavior within the same task, that is not the same thing as switching betweencontexts, which typically involves a reevaluation of what the current task might be. Nevertheless, I am optimisticthat essentially the same processes of fluid functional and structural reconfiguration, driven in a bottom-up way bylow-level neurochemical dynamics, may be at the heart of the more complex capacity.65Meanwhile, Wheeler’s ambivalence concerning which model is more basic, the representational or the dynamic,undermines his Heideggerian approach. For, as Wheeler himself sees, the Heideggerian claim is that action-orientedcoping, as long as it is involved (online, Wheeler would say) is not representational at all and does not involveany problem solving, and that all representational problem solving takes place offline and presupposes involvedbackground coping. Showing in detail how the representational un-ready-to-hand in all its forms depends upon abackground of holistic, nonrepresentational coping is exactly the Heideggerian project and would, indeed, be the mostimportant contribution that Heideggerian AI could make to Cognitive Science. Indeed, a Heideggerian Cognitive Sci-ence would require working out an ontology, phenomenology, and brain model, that denies a basic role to any sort ofrepresentation—even action oriented ones—and defends a dynamical model like Merleau-Ponty’s and van Gelder’sthat gives a primordial place to equilibrium and in general to rich coupling.Ultimately, we will have to choose which sort of AI and which sort of neuroscience to back, and so we are led tothe questions: could the brain in its causal support of our active coping instantiate a richly coupled dynamical system,and is there any evidence it actually does so? If so, could this coupling be modeled on a digital computer to give usHeideggerian AI or at least Merleau-Pontian AI? And would that solve the frame problem?8. Walter Freeman’s Merleau-Pontian neurodynamicsWe have seen that our experience of the everyday world (not the universe) is given as already organized in termsof significance and relevance, and that significance can’t be constructed by giving meaning to brute facts—bothbecause we don’t normally experience brute facts and, even if we did, no value predicate could do the job of givingthem situational significance. Yet, all that the organism can receive is mere physical energy. How can such senselessphysical stimulation be experienced directly as significant? All generally accepted neuro-models fail to help, evenwhen they talk of dynamic coupling, since they still accept the basic Cartesian model, viz.:1. The brain receives input from the universe by way of its sense organs (the picture on the retina, the vibrations inthe cochlea, the odorant particles in the nasal passages, etc.).2. Out of this stimulus information, the brain abstracts features, which it uses to construct a representation of theworld.This is supposedly accomplished either (a) by applying rules such as the frames and scripts of GOFAI—an approachthat is generally acknowledged to have failed to solve the frame problem. Or (b) by strengthening or weakeningweights on connections between simulated neurons in a simulated neural network depending on the success or failureof the net’s output as defined by the net designer. Significance is thus added from outside since the net is not seekinganything. This approach does not even try to capture the animal’s way of actively determining the significance of thestimulus on the basis of its past experience and its current arousal.Both these approaches treat the computer or brain as a passive receiver of bits of meaningless data, which then haveto have significance added to them. The big problem for the traditional neuro-science approach is, then, to understandhow the brain binds the relevant features to each other. That is, the problem for normal neuro-science is how to pickout and relate features relevant to each other from among all the independent, isolated features picked up by each ofthe independent isolated receptors. For example, is the redness that has just been detected relevant to the square or thecircle shape also detected in the current input? This problem is the neural version of the frame problem in AI: Howcan the brain keep track of which facts in its representation of the current world are relevant to which other facts?65 Wheeler, Reconstructing the Cognitive World, 279.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601151Like the frame problem, as long as the mind/brain is thought of as passively receiving meaningless inputs that needto have significance and relevance added to them, the binding problem has remained unsolved and is almost certainlyunsolvable. Somehow the phenomenologist’s description of how the active organism has direct access to significancemust be built into the neuroscientific model.Wheeler has argued persuasively for the importance of a positive alternative in overthrowing established researchparadigms. Without such a positive account the phenomenological observation that the world is its own best represen-tation, and that the significance we find in our world is constantly enriched by our experience in it, seems to requirethat the brain be what Dennett derisively calls “wonder tissue.”Fortunately, there is at least one model of how the brain could provide the causal basis for the intentional arcand so avoid the binding problem. Walter Freeman, a founding figure in neurodynamics and one of the first to takeseriously the idea of the brain as a nonlinear dynamical system,66 has worked out an account of how the brain of anactive animal can directly pick up and augment significance in its world. On the basis of years of work on olfaction,vision, touch, and hearing in alert and moving rabbits, Freeman has developed a model of rabbit learning based on thecoupling of the rabbit’s brain and the environment. He maintains:[T]he brain moves beyond the mere extraction of features . . . it combines sensory messages with past experience. . . to identify both the stimulus and its particular meaning to the individual.67To bring out the structural analogy of Freeman’s account to Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenological descriptions,I propose to map Freeman’s neurodynamic model onto the phenomena Merleau-Ponty has described. Freeman’s neu-rodynamics implies the involvement of the whole brain in perception and action, but for explaining the core of hisideas I’ll focus on the dynamics of the olfactory bulb, since his key research was done on that part of the rabbit brain.8.1. Direct perception of significance and the rejection of the binding problemWhile all other researchers assume the passive reception of input from the universe, Freeman, like Merleau-Pontyon the phenomenological level, and Gibson on the (ecological) psychology level, develops a third position betweenthe intellectualist and the empiricist. Merleau-Ponty, Gibson, and Freeman take as basic that the brain is embodied inan animal moving in the environment to satisfy its needs.Freeman maintains that information about the world is not gained by detecting meaningless features and processingthese features step-by-step upwards toward a unified representation. The binding problem only arises as an artifact oftrying to interpret the output of isolated cells in the receptors of immobilized organisms. Rather, Freeman turns theproblem around and asks: Given that the environment is already significant for the animal, how can the animal selecta unified significant figure from the noisy background? This turns the binding problem into a selection problem. Aswe shall see, however, this selection is not among patterns existing in the world but among patterns in the animal thathave been formed by its prior interaction with the world.In Freeman’s neurodynamic model, the animal’s perceptual system is primed by past experience and arousal toseek and be rewarded by relevant experiences. In the case of the rabbit, these could be carrot smells found in the66 Wheeler explains:[F]or the purposes of a dynamical systems approach to Cognitive Science, a dynamical system may be defined as any system in which there isstate-dependent change, where systemic change is state dependent just in case the future behavior of the system depends causally on the currentstate of the system. (Reconstructing the Cognitive World, 91.)[N]onlinear dynamical systems exhibit a property known as sensitive dependence on initial conditions, according to which the trajectories thatflow from two adjacent initial-condition-points diverge rapidly. This means that a small change in the initial state of the system becomes, after arelatively short time, a large difference in the evolving state of the system. This is one of the distinguishing marks of the phenomenon of chaos.. . .[Consider] the case of two theoretically separable dynamical systems that are bound together, in a mathematically describable way, such thatsome of the parameters of each system either are, or are functions of, some of the state variables of the other. At any particular time, the stateof each of these systems will, in a sense, fix the dynamics of the other system. Such systems will evolve through time in a relation of complexand intimate mutual influence, and are said to be coupled. (Reconstructing the Cognitive World, 93.)67 Walter J. Freeman, The physiology of perception, Scientific American, Vol. 242, February 1991, 78.1152H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160course of seeking and eating a carrot. When the animal succeeds, the connections between those cells in the rabbit’solfactory bulb that were involved are strengthened according to “the widely accepted Hebbian rule, which holds thatsynapses between neurons that fire together become stronger, as long as the synchronous firing is accompanied by areward.”68 The neurons that fire together wire together to form what Hebb called cell assemblies. The cell assembliesthat are formed by the rabbit’s response to what is significant for it are in effect tuned to select the significant sensoryinput from the background noise. For example, those cells involved in a previous narrow escape from a fox would bewired together in a cell assembly. Then, in an environment previously experienced as dangerous, those cell assembliessensitive to the smell of foxes would be primed to respond.Freeman notes that: “For a burst [of neuronal activity] to occur in response to some odorant, the neurons of theassembly and the bulb as whole must first be “primed” to respond strongly to that specific input.”69 And he adds: “Ourexperiments show that the gain [sensitivity to input] in neuronal collections increases in the bulb and olfactory cortexwhen the animal is hungry, thirsty, sexually aroused or threatened.”70 So, if a male animal has just eaten and is readyto mate, the gain is turned down on the cell assemblies responsive to food smells, and turned up on female smells.Thus, from the start the cells assemblies are not just passive receivers of meaningless input from the universe but, onthe basis of past experience, are tuned to respond to what is significant to the animal given its arousal.Once we see that the cell assemblies in involved, coping animals respond directly to significant aspects of theenvironment, we can also see why the binding problem need not arise. The problem is an artifact of trying to interpretthe output of isolated cells in the cortex of animals from the perspective of the researcher rather than the perspectiveof the animal. That is, the researcher, like Merleau-Ponty’s intellectualist, interprets the firing of the cells in the senseorgan as responding to features of an object-type—features such as orange, round, and tapered that can be specifiedindependently of the object to which they belong. The researcher then has the problem of how the brain binds theseisolated features into a representation of, say, a carrot (and adds the function predicate, good to eat). But, accordingto Freeman, in an active, hungry animal the output from the isolated detector cells triggers a cell assembly alreadytuned to detect the relevant input on the basis of past significant experience, which, in turn puts the brain into a statethat signals to the limbic system eat this now, without the brain ever having to solve the problem of how the isolatedfeatures abstracted by the researchers are brought together into the presentation of an object.Freeman, dramatically describes the brain activity involved:If the odorant is familiar and the bulb has been primed by arousal, the information spreads like a flash fire throughthe nerve cell assembly. First, excitatory input to one part of the assembly during a sniff excites the other parts, viathe Hebbian synapses. Then those parts reexcite the first, increasing the gain, and so forth, so that the input rapidlyignites an explosion of collective activity throughout the assembly. The activity of the assembly, in turn, guides theentire bulb into a new state by igniting a full-blown burst.71Specifically, after each sniff, the rabbit’s olfactory bulb goes into one of several possible states that neural modelerstraditionally call energy states. A state tends toward minimum “energy” the way a ball tends to roll towards the bottomof a container, no matter where it starts from within the container. Each possible minimal energy state is called anattractor. The brain states that tend towards a particular attractor no matter where they start in the basin are calledthat attractor’s basin of attraction. As the brain activation to pulled into an attractor, the brain in effect selects themeaningful stimulus from the background.Thus the stimuli need not be processed into a representation of the current situation on the basis of which the brainthen has to infer what is present in the environment. Rather on Freeman’s account, the rabbit’s brain forms a newbasin of attraction for each new significant class of inputs. The significance of past experience is preserved in basinsof attraction. The set of basins of attraction that an animal has learned form what is called an attractor landscape.According to Freeman:68 Ibid. 81.69 Ibid. 8270 Ibid.71 Ibid. 83.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601153The state space of the cortex can therefore be said to comprise an attractor landscape with several adjoining basinsof attraction, one for each class of learned stimuli.72Thus Freeman contends that each new attractor does not represent, say, a carrot, or the smell of carrot, or evenwhat to do with a carrot. Rather, the brain’s current state is the result of the sum of the animal’s past experiences withcarrots. What in the physical input is directly picked up and resonated to when the rabbit sniffs, then, is the affords-eating,73 and the brain state is directly coupled with (or in Gibson’s terms resonates to) the affordance offered by thecurrent carrot.Freeman offers a helpful analogy:We conceive each cortical dynamical system as having a state space through which the system travels as a pointmoving along a path (trajectory) through the state space. A simple analogy is a spaceship flying over a landscapewith valley resembling the craters on the moon. An expected stimulus contained in the omnipresent backgroundinput selects a crater into which the ship descends. We call the lowest area in each crater an ‘attractor’ to whichthe system trajectory goes, and the set of craters basins of attraction in an attractor landscape. There is a differentattractor for each class of stimuli that the system [is primed] to expect.74Freeman concludes: “The macroscopic bulbar patterns [do] not relate to the stimulus directly but instead to the sig-nificance of the stimulus.”75 Indeed, after triggering a specific attractor and modifying it, the stimulus—the impressionmade on the receptor cells in the sense organ—has no further job to perform. Freeman explains:The new pattern is selected by the stimulus from the internal pre-existing repertoire [of attractors], not imposed bythe stimulus. It is determined by prior experience with this class of stimulus. The pattern expresses the nature ofthe class and its significance for the subject rather than the particular event. The identities of the particular neuronsin the receptor class that are activated are irrelevant and are not retained76 . . . Having played its role in setting theinitial conditions, the sense-dependent activity is washed away.77Thus, as Merleau-Ponty claims and psychological experiments confirm, we normally have no experience of the datapicked up by the sense organs.788.2. Learning and Merleau-Ponty’s intentional arcThus, according to Freeman’s model, when hungry, frightened, etc., the rabbit sniffs around seeking food, runstoward a hiding place, or does whatever else prior experience has taught it is successful. The weights on the animal’sneural connections are then changed on the basis of the quality of its resulting experience. That is, they are changedin a way that reflects the extent to which the result satisfied the animal’s current need.Freeman claims his read-out from the rabbit’s brain shows that each learning experience with a previously unknownstimulus, or an unimportant stimulus class that is significant in a new way, sets up a new attractor for that class andrearranges all the other attractor basins in the landscape:72 Freeman, How Brains Make Up Their Minds, New York: Columbia University Press, 2000, 62. (Quotations from Freeman’s books have beenreviewed by him and sometimes modified to correspond to his latest vocabulary and way of thinking about the phenomenon.)73 Thus Freeman’s model might well describe the brain activity presupposed by Gibson’s talk of “resonating” to affordances.74 Freeman, Nonlinear dynamics of intentionality. Journal of Mind and Behavior 18: 291–304, 1997. The attractors are abstractions relative towhat level of abstraction is significant given what the animal is seeking.75 Freeman, Societies of Brains: A study in the neuroscience of love and hate, The Spinoza Lectures, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Hillsdale, N.J.:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publisher, 1995, 59. (My italics.)76 Freeman, Societies of Brains, 66. (My italics.)77 Ibid. 67.78 Sean Kelly, Content and constancy: Phenomenology, psychology, and the content of perception, forthcoming in Philosophy and Phenomeno-logical Research.1154H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160I have observed that brain activity patterns are constantly dissolving, reforming and changing, particularly in rela-tion to one another. When an animal learns to respond to a new odor, there is a shift in all other patterns, even if theyare not directly involved with the learning. There are no fixed representations, as there are in [GOFAI] computers;there are only significances.79The constantly updated landscape of attractors is presumably correlated with the agent’s experience of the changingsignificance of things in the world, that is, with the intentional arc.Freeman adds:I conclude that context dependence is an essential property of the cerebral memory system, in which each newexperience must change all of the existing store by some small amount, in order that a new entry be incorporatedand fully deployed in the existing body of experience. This property contrasts with memory stores in computers. . . in which each item is positioned by an address or a branch of a search tree. There, each item has a compart-ment, and new items don’t change the old ones. Our data indicate that in brains the store has no boundaries orcompartments. . . . Each new state transition . . . initiates the construction of a local pattern that impinges on andmodifies the whole intentional structure.80Merleau-Ponty likewise concludes that, thanks to the intentional arc, no two experiences of the world are ever exactlyalike.81It is important to realize how different this model is from any representationalist account. There is no fixed andindependent intentional structure in the brain—not even a latent one. There is nothing that can be found in the olfactorybulb in isolation that represents or even corresponds to anything in the world. There is only the fact that, given the waythe nerve cell assemblies have been wired on the basis of past experience, when the animal is in a state of arousal andis in the presence of a significant item such as food or a potential predator or a mate, the bulb will go into a certainattractor state. That activity state in the current interaction of animal and environment corresponds to the whole worldof the organism with some aspect salient. The activity is not an isolate brain state but only comes into existence andonly is maintained as long as, and in so far as, it is dynamically coupled with the significant situation in the world thatselected it, and does not exist apart from it. Whereas, as we have seen, in the cognitivist notion of representations, arepresentation exists apart from what it represents.Thus Freeman offers a model of learning which is not an associationist model according to which, as one learns,one adds more and more fixed connection, nor a cognitivist model based on off-line representations of objective factsabout the world that enable off line inferences as to which facts to expect next, and what they mean. Rather, Freeman’smodel instantiates the causal basis of a genuine intentional arc in which there are no linear casual connections betweenworld and brain nor a fixed library of representations, but where, each time a new significance is encountered, thewhole perceptual world of the animal changes so that the significance that is directly displayed in the world of theanimal is continually enriched.8.3. The perception/action loopThe brain’s movement towards the bottom of a particular basin of attraction underlies the perceiver’s perceptionof the significance for action of a particular experience.82 For example, if a carrot affords eating the rabbit is directlyreadied to eat the carrot, or perhaps readied to carry off the carrot depending on which attractor is currently activated.Freeman tells us:79 Freeman, How Brains Make Up Their Minds, 22.80 Freeman, Societies of Brains, 99. (My italics.)81 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, 216.82 See Sean Kelly, The Logic of Motor Intentionality, Unpublished draft. Also, Corbin Collins describes the phenomenology of this motor inten-tionality and spells out the logical form of what he calls instrumental predicates. See, “Body Intentionality,” Inquiry, Dec. 1988.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601155The same global states that embody the significance provide . . . the patterns that make choices between availableoptions and that guide the motor systems into sequential movements of intentional behavior.83The animal must take account of how things are going and either continue on a promising path, or, if the overall actionis not going as well as anticipated, the brain must self-organize so the attractor system jumps to another attractor.This either causes the animal to act in such a way as to increase its sense of impending reward, or the brain willshift attractors again, until it lands in one that makes such an improvement. The attractors can change like switchingfrom frame to frame in a movie film with each further sniff or with each shift of attention. If the rabbit achieveswhat it is seeking, a report of its success is fed back to reset the sensitivity of the olfactory bulb. And the cycle isrepeated.Freeman’s overall picture of skilled perception and action, then, is as follows. The animal, let’s say a rabbit sniffinga carrot, receives stimuli that, thanks to prior Hebbian learning, puts its olfactory bulb into a specific attractor basin. Forexample, the attractor that has been formed by, and amounts to, the brain’s classification of the stimulus as affordingeating. Along with other brain systems, the bulb selects a response. The rabbit is solicited to eat this now. It would betoo cognitivist to say the bulb sends a message, to the appropriate part of the brain and too mechanistic to say the bulbcauses the activity of eating the carrot. The meaning of the input is neither in the stimulus nor in a mechanical responsedirectly triggered by the stimulus. Significance is not stored as a memory-representation nor an association. Ratherthe memory of significance is in the repertoire of attractors as classifications of possible responses—the attractorsthemselves being the product of past experience.Once the stimulus has been classified by selecting an attractor that says eat this now, the problem for the brain isjust how this eating is to be done. On-line coping needs a stimuli-driven feedback policy dictating how to move rapidlyover the terrain and approach and eat the carrot. Here, an actor-critic version of Temporal Difference ReinforcementLearning (TDRL) can serve to augment the Freeman model.According to TDRL, learning the appropriate movements in the current situation requires learning the expectedfinal award as well as the movements. These two functions are learned slowly through repeated experiences. Thenthe brain can monitor directly whether the expectation of reward is being met as the rabbit approaches the carrot toeat it. If the expected final reward suddenly decreases due, for example, to the current inaccessibility of the carrot,the relevant part of the brain prompts the olfactory bulb to switch to a new attractor or perspective on the situationthat dictates a different learned action, say dragging the carrot with its expected reward.84 Only after a skill is thusacquired can the current stimuli, plus the past history of responding to related stimuli now wired into cell assemblies,produce the rapid responses required for on-going skillful coping.8.4. Optimal gripThe animal’s movements are presumably experienced by the animal as tending towards getting and maintaining anoptimal perceptual take on what is currently significant, and, where appropriate, an ongoing optimal bodily grip on it.As Merleau-Ponty says: “through [my] body I am at grips with the world.”85 Freeman sees his account of the braindynamics underlying perception and action as structurally isomorphic with Merleau-Ponty’s. He explains:Merleau-Ponty concludes that we are moved to action by disequilibrium between the self and the world. In dynamicterms, the disequilibrium . . . puts the brain onto . . . a pathway through a chain of preferred states, which are learnedbasins of attraction. The penultimate result is not an equilibrium in the chemical sense, which is a dead state, but adescent for a time into the basin of an attractor . . . .86Thus, according to Freeman, in governing action the brain normally moves from one basin of attraction to anotherdescending into each basin for a time without coming permanently to rest in any one basin. The body is thereby led to83 Freeman, How Brains Make Up Their Minds, 114.84 Stuart E. Dreyfus, “Totally Model-Free Learned Skillful Coping.” Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society, Vol. 24, No. 3, June 2004,182–187. This article, however, does not discuss the role of a controlling attractor or the use of expected reward to jump to a new attractor.85 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, 303.86 Freeman, How Brains Make Up Their Minds, 121.1156H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160move towards a maximal grip but, instead of remaining at rest when a maximal grip is achieved, the coupled coper isdrawn to move on in response to another affordance that solicits the body to take up the same task from another angle,or to turn to the next task that grows out of the current one.The selected attractor, together with input from the sense organs, then signals the limbic system to implement anew action with its new expected reward. Then again a signal comes back to the olfactory bulb and elsewhere as towhether the activity is progressing as expected. If so, the current attractor and action will be maintained but, if theresult is not as expected, with the formation of the next attractor landscape some other attractor will be selected on thebasis of past learning. In Merleau-Ponty’s terms, Freeman’s model, as we have seen, explains the intentional arc—howour previous coping experiences feed back to determine what action the current situation solicits—while the TDRLmodel keeps the animal moving toward a sense of minimal tension, that is, a least rate of change in expected reward,and hence towards achieving and maintaining what Merleau-Ponty calls a maximal grip.8.5. Circular causalitySuch systems are self-organizing. Freeman explains:Macroscopic ensembles exist in many materials, at many scales in space and time, ranging from . . . weather systemssuch as hurricanes and tornadoes, even to galaxies. In each case, the behavior of the microscopic elements orparticles is constrained by the embedding ensemble, and microscopic behavior cannot be understood except withreference to the macroscopic patterns of activity . . . .87Thus, the cortical field controls the neurons that create the field. In Freeman’s terms, in this sort of circular causalitythe overall activity “enslaves” the elements. As he emphasizes:Having attained through dendritic and axonal growth a certain density of anatomical connections, the neuronscease to act individually and start participating as part of a group, to which each contributes and from which eachaccepts direction . . . . The activity level is now determined by the population, not by the individuals. This is thefirst building block of neurodynamics.88Given the way the whole brain can be tuned by past experience to influence individual neuron activity, Freemancan claim:Measurements of the electrical activity of brains show that dynamical states of Neuroactivity emerge like vorticesin a weather system, triggered by physical energies impinging onto sensory receptors. . . . 89Merleau-Ponty seems to anticipate Freeman’s neurodynamics when he says:It is necessary only to accept the fact that the physico-chemical actions of which the organism is in a certainmanner composed, instead of unfolding in parallel and independent sequences, are constituted . . . in relativelystable “vortices.”909. Freeman’s model as a basis for Heideggerian AIAccording to Freeman, the discreteness of global state transitions from one attractor basin to another makes it pos-sible to model the brain’s activity on a computer. The model uses numbers to stand for these discrete state transitions.He notes that:87 Ibid. 52.88 Ibid. 53.89 Freeman, Societies of Brains, 111.90 Merleau-Ponty, The Structure of Behavior, 153.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601157At macroscopic levels each perceptual pattern of Neuroactivity is discrete, because it is marked by state transitionswhen it is formed and ended. . . . I conclude that brains don’t use numbers as symbols, but they do use discreteevents in time and space, so we can represent them . . . by numbers in order to model brain states with digitalcomputers.91That is, the states of the model are representations of brain states, not of the features of things in the everyday world.Just as simulated neural nets simulate brain processing but do not contain symbols that represent features of the world,the computer can model the series of discrete state transitions from basin to basin, thereby modeling how, on the basisof past experiences of success or failure, physical inputs are directly perceivable as significant for the organism. Butthe model is not an intentional being, only a description of such.Freeman has actually programmed his model of the brain as a dynamic physical system, and so claims to haveshown what the brain is doing to provide the material substrate for Heidegger’s and Merleau-Ponty’s phenomeno-logical account of everyday perception and action. This may well be the new paradigm for the Cognitive Sciencesthat Wheeler proposes to present in his book but which he fails to find. It would show how the emerging embodied-embedded approach could be step towards a genuinely existential AI. Although, as we shall see, it would still be a verylong way from programming human intelligence. Meanwhile, the job of phenomenologists is to get clear concerningthe phenomena that must to be explained. That would include an account of how human beings, unlike the so-calledHeideggerian computer models we have discussed, don’t just ignore the frame problem nor solve it, but show why itdoesn’t occur.10. How Heideggerian AI would dissolve rather than avoid or solve the frame problemAs we have seen, Wheeler rightly thinks that the simplest test of the viability of any proposed AI program iswhether it can solve the frame problem. We’ve also seen that the two current supposedly Heideggerian approachesto AI avoid rather than solve the frame problem. Brooks’s empiricist/behaviorist approach in which the environmentdirectly causes responses avoids it by leaving out significance and learning altogether, while Agre’s action-orientedapproach, which includes only a small fixed set of possibly relevant responses, fails to face the problem of changingrelevance.Wheeler’s own proposal, however, by introducing flexible action-oriented representations, like any representationalapproach, has to face the frame problem head on. To see why, we need only slightly revise his statement of the frameproblem (quoted earlier), substituting “representation” for “belief”:[G]iven a dynamically changing world, how is a nonmagical system . . . to retrieve and (if necessary) to revise, outof all the representations that it possesses, just those representations that are relevant in some particular context ofaction?92Wheeler’s frame problem, then, is to explain how his allegedly Heideggerian system can determine in some sys-tematic way which of the action-oriented representations it contains or can generate are relevant in a current situation,and keep track of how this relevance changes with changes in the situation.Given his emphasis on problem solving and representations, it is not surprising that the concluding chapter ofWheeler’s book, where he returns to the frame problem to test his proposed Heideggerian AI, offers no solution ordissolution of the problem. Instead, he asks us to “give some credence to [his] informed intuitions,”93 which I take tobe on the scent of Freeman’s account of rabbit olfaction, that nonrepresentational causal coupling must play a crucialrole. But I take issue with his conclusion that:in extreme cases the neural contribution will be nonrepresentational in character. In other cases, representationswill be active partners alongside certain additional factors, but those representations will be action oriented in91 Freeman, Societies of Brains 105.92 Wheeler, Reconstructing the Cognitive World, 179.93 Ibid. 279.1158H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160character, and so will realize the same content-sparse, action-specific, egocentric, context-dependent profile thatHeideggerian phenomenology reveals to be distinctive of online representational states at the agential level.94But for Heidegger, all representational accounts are part of the problem. Wheeler’s account, so far as I understandit, gives no explanation of how online dynamic coupling is supposed to dissolve the online frame problem. Nor doesit help to wheel in, as Wheeler does, action-oriented representations and the extended mind. Any attempt to solvethe frame problem by giving any role to any sort of representational states, even online ones, has so far proved tobe a dead end. It looks like nonrepresentational neural activity can’t be understood to be the “extreme case.” Rather,such activity must be, as Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty and Freeman contend, our basic way of responding directly torelevance in the everyday world, so that the frame problem does not arise.Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty argue that, and Freeman demonstrates how, thanks to our embodied coping and theintentional arc it makes possible, we directly respond to relevance and our skill in sensing and responding to relevantchanges in the world is constantly improved. In coping in a particular context, say a classroom, we learn to ignoremost of what is in the room, but, if it gets too warm, the windows solicit us to open them. We ignore the chalk dust inthe corners and the chalk marks on the desks but we attend to the chalk marks on the blackboard. We take for grantedthat what we write on the board doesn’t affect the windows, even if we write, “open windows,” and what we do withthe windows doesn’t affect what’s on the board. And as we constantly refine this background know-how, the things inthe room and its layout become more and more familiar, take on more and more significance, and each thing draws usto act when an action is relevant. Thus we become better able to cope with change. Given our experience in the world,whenever there is a change in the current context we respond to it only if in the past it has turned out to be significant,and even when we sense a significant change we treat everything else as unchanged except what our familiarity withthe world suggests might also have changed and so needs to be checked out. Thus, for embedded–embodied beings alocal version of the frame problem does not arise.But the frame problem reasserts itself when we consider changing contexts. How do we sense when a situation onthe horizon has become relevant to our current task? When Merleau-Ponty describes the phenomenon, he speaks ofone’s attention being drawn by an affordance on the margin of one’s current experience:To see an object is either to have it on the fringe of the visual field and be able to concentrate on it, or else respondto this summons by actually concentrating on it.95Thus, for example, as one faces the front of a house, one’s body is already being summoned (not just prepared) to goaround the house to get a better look at its back.96Merleau-Ponty’s treatment of what Husserl calls the inner horizon of the perceptual object, e.g. its insides andback, applies equally to our experience of a situation’s outer horizon of other potential situations. As I cope with aspecific task in a specific situation, other situations that have in the past been relevant are right now present on thehorizon of my experience as potentially (not merely possibly) relevant to my current situation.If Freeman is right, our sense of familiar-but-not-currently-fully-present aspects of what is currently ready-to-hand, as well as our sense of other potentially relevant familiar situations on the horizon of the current situation,might well be correlated with the fact that brain activity is not simply in one attractor basin at a time but is influencedby other attractor basins in the same landscape, as well as by other attractor landscapes which under what havepreviously been experienced as relevant conditions are ready to draw current brain activity into themselves. Accordingto Freeman, what makes us open to the horizontal influence of other attractors is that the whole system of attractorlandscapes collapses and is rebuilt with each new rabbit sniff, or in our case, presumably with each shift in ourattention. And after each collapse, a new landscape may be formed on the basis of new significant stimuli—a landscapein which, thanks to past experiences, a different attractor is active.97 This presumably underlies our experience of beingsummoned.94 Ibid. 276. (My italics.)95 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, 67. (My italics.)96 Kelly, Seeing things in Merleau-Ponty, in The Cambridge Companion to Merleau-Ponty.97 We do not experience these rapid changes of attractor landscapes anymore than we experience the flicker in changes of movie frames. Noteverything going on in the brain is reflected in the phenomena.H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–11601159And, once one correlates Freeman’s neurodynamic account with Merleau-Ponty’s description of the way the in-tentional arc feeds back our past experience into the way the world appears to us so that the world solicits from usever-more-appropriate responses to its significance, we can see that we can be directly summoned to respond appro-priately not only to what is relevant in our current situation, but we may be summoned by other familiar situationson the horizon of the present one. Then the fact that we can deal with changing relevance by anticipating what willchange and what will stay the same no longer seems unsolvable.But there is a generalization of the problem of relevance, and thus of the frame problem, that still seems intractable.In What Computers Can’t Do I gave an example of the possible relevance of everything to everything. In placing aracing bet we can usually restrict ourselves to such relevant facts as the horse’s age, jockey, and past performancebut there are always other factors such as whether the horse is allergic to goldenrod or whether the jockey has justhad a fight with the owner, which in some cases can be decisive. Human handicappers are capable of noticing suchanomalies when they come across them.98 But since anything in experience could be relevant to anything else, forrepresentational/computation AI such an ability seems incomprehensible. Jerry Fodor follows up on my pessimisticexample:“The problem,” he tells us, “is to get the structure of an entire belief system to bear on individual occasions ofbelief fixation. We have, to put it bluntly, no computational formalisms that show us how to do this, and we haveno idea how such formalisms might be developed. . . . If someone—a Dreyfus, for example—were to ask us whywe should even suppose that the digital computer is a plausible mechanism for the simulation of global cognitiveprocesses, the answering silence would be deafening.99But, if we give up the cognitivist assumption that we have to relate isolated meaningless facts and events to eachother, and we see that all facts and events are experienced on the background of a familiar world, we can see theoutline of a solution. The handicapper has a sense of which situations are significant. He has learned to ignore manyanomalies, such as an eclipse or an invasion of grasshoppers that have so far not turned out to be important, but,given his familiarity with human sports requiring freedom from distraction, he may well be sensitive to the anom-alies mentioned above. Of course, given his lack of experience with the new anomaly, it will not show its relevanceon its face and summon an immediate appropriate response. Rather, the handicapper will have to step back andfigure out whether the anomaly is relevant and, if so, how. Unfamiliar breakdowns require us to go off-line andthink.In his deliberations, the handicapper will draw on his background familiarity with how things in the world behave.Allergies and arguments normally interfere with one’s doing one’s best, etc. Of course, given his lack of experiencewith this particular situation, any conclusion he reaches will be risky, but he can sense that a possibly relevant situationhas entered the horizon of his current task and his familiarity with similar situations will give him some guidance indeciding what to do. While such a conclusion will not be the formal computational solution required by Cognitivism,it is correlated with Freeman’s claim that on the basis of past experience, attractors and whole landscapes can directlyinfluence each other.100 This suggests that the handicapper need not be at a loss; that this extreme version of theframe problem, like all the simpler versions, is an artifact of the atomistic cognitivist/computational approach to themind/brain’s relation to the world.11. ConclusionIt would be satisfying if we could now conclude that, with the help of Merleau-Ponty and Freeman, we can fix whatis wrong with current allegedly Heideggerian AI by making it more Heideggerian. There is, however, a big remainingproblem. Merleau-Ponty’s and Freeman’s account of how we directly pick up significance and improve our sensitivity98 Hubert L. Dreyfus, What Computers Can’t Do (New York, NY: Harper and Row, 1997), 258.99 Jerry A. Fodor, The Modularity of Mind (Bradford/MIT Press, 1983), 128–129.100 Freeman writes: “From my analysis of EEG patterns, I speculate that consciousness reflects operations by which the entire knowledge store inan intentional structure is brought instantly into play each moment of the waking life of an animal, putting into immediate service all that an animalhas learned in order to solve its problems, without the need for look-up tables and random access memory systems.” Freeman, Societies of Brains,136.1160H.L. Dreyfus / Artificial Intelligence 171 (2007) 1137–1160to relevance depends on our responding to what is significant for us given our needs, body size, ways of moving, and soforth, not to mention our personal and cultural self-interpretation. If we can’t make our brain model responsive to thesignificance in the environment as it shows up specifically for human beings, the project of developing an embeddedand embodied Heideggerian AI can’t get off the ground.Thus, to program Heideggerian AI, we would not only need a model of the brain functioning underlying coupledcoping such as Freeman’s; we would also need—and here’s the rub—a model of our particular way of being embeddedand embodied such that what we experience is significant for us in the particular way that it is. That is, we would haveto include in our program a model of a body very much like ours with our needs, desires, pleasures, pains, ways ofmoving, cultural background, etc.So, according to the view I have been presenting, even if the Heideggerian/Merleau-Pontian approach to AI sug-gested by Freeman is ontologically sound in a way that GOFAI and subsequent supposedly Heideggerian modelsproposed by Brooks, Agre, and Wheeler are not, a neurodynamic computer model would still have to be given a de-tailed description of a body and motivations like ours if things were to count as significant for it so that it could learnto act intelligently in our world.101 We have seen that Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and Freeman offer us hints of theelaborate and subtle body and brain structures we would have to model and how to model some of them, but this onlymakes the task of a Heideggerian AI seem all the more difficult and casts doubt on whether we will ever be able toaccomplish it.102We can, however, make some progress towards animal AI. Freeman has actually used his brain model to modelintelligent devices.103 Specifically, he and his coworkers have modeled the activity of the brain of the salamandersufficiently to simulate the salamander’s foraging and self-preservation capacities. The model seeks out the sensorystimuli that make available the information it needs to reach its goals. Presumably such a simulated salamander couldlearn to run a maze and so have a primitive intentional arc and avoid a primitive frame problem. Thus, one can envisagea kind of animal Artificial Intelligence inspired by Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty, but that is no reason to believe, andthere are many reasons to doubt, that such a device would be a first step on a continuum towards making a machinecapable of simulating human coping with what is significant.101 Dennett sees the “daunting” problem, but he is undaunted. He optimistically sketches out the task:Cog, . . . must have goal-registrations and preference-functions that map in rough isomorphism to human desires. This is so for many reasons,of course. Cog won’t work at all unless it has its act together in a daunting number of different regards. It must somehow delight in learning,abhor error, strive for novelty, recognize progress. It must be vigilant in some regards, curious in others, and deeply unwilling to engage inself-destructive activity.(“Consciousness in Human and Robot Minds,” IIAS Symposium, Cognition, Computation and Consciousness, Kyoto, September 1–3, 1994, in Ito,et al., eds., Cognition, Computation and Consciousness, Oxford University Press.)102 Freeman runs up against his own version of this problem and faces it frankly: “It can be shown that the more the system is ‘open’ to the externalworld (more are the links), the better its neuronal correlation can be realized. However, in the setting up of these correlations also enter quantitieswhich are intrinsic to the system, they are internal parameters and may represent (parameterize) subjective attitudes. Our model, however, is notable to provide a dynamics for these variations . . . .” [W.J. Freeman and G. Vitiello, Nonlinear brain dynamics as macroscopic manifestation ofunderlying many-body field dynamics, 21.]103 Freeman writes in a personal communication: “Regarding intentional robots that you discuss in your last paragraph, my colleagues RobertKozma and Peter Erdí have already implemented my brain model for intentional behavior at the level of the salamander in a Sony AIBO (artificialdog) that learns to run a simple maze. See: Kozma R, Freeman WJ, Erdí P (2003) The KIV model—nonlinear spatio-temporal dynamics of theprimordial vertebrate forebrain. Neurocomputing 52: 819–826. http://repositories.cdlib.org/postprints/1049, Kozma R, Freeman WJ (2003) Basicprinciples of the KIV model and its application to the navigation problem. J Integrat. Neuroscience 2: 125–145, and also in a prototype MartianRover at the JPL in Pasadena: Kozma R (2005) Dynamical Approach to Behavior-Based Robot Control and Autonomy Biol Cybern 92(6): 367–379.And also in a prototype Martian Rover at the JPL in Pasadena.