Artificial Intelligence 104 (1998) 265-286 Artificial Intelligence Why Gijdel’s theorem cannot refute computationalism Geoffrey LaForte, Patrick J. Hayes *, Kenneth M. Ford ’ Institute for Human Machine Cognition, Universi@ of Wesf Florida, Pensacolu, FL 32514, USA Received 13 August 1997; received in revised form 2 June 1998 Abstract Giidel’s theorem theorem to prove that Glidel’s is consistent with the computationalist hypothesis. Roger Penrose, however, claims thought cannot be mechanized. We review his arguments and show how they are flawed. Penrose’s arguments depend crucially on ambiguities between precise and imprecise cause the GSdel/Turing diagonalization human abilities argument will also fail in the same ways. 0 1998 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. senses of key terms. We show that these ambiguities intuitive claims about that any similar to paradoxical or highly idiosyncratic to lead from apparently and conclude that human conclusions, argument implies Kqwords: GGdel; Computationalism; Truth 1. Introduction The original ambition of Artificial hypothesis, Intelligence is to understand human intelligence (AI), often summarized Simon’s computationalist as computation. This is really rather a grand ambition; not surprisingly, perhaps, such intellectual hubris has raised considerable to prove it impossible. The such attempt has been made by Sir Roger Penrose most recent and most highly publicized in a series of books, papers and on-line discussions. Penrose claims that the impossibility of AI follows from the fact that human mathematical argument based on the famous Giidel-Turing is noncomputable, several attempts undecidability opposition, including intuition using an as Newell and Our purpose here is not to give arguments hypothesis, or to defend it against the many other attacks which have been made upon it, but only to discuss theorems. for the computationalist * Corresponding ’ Currently at NASA Ames Research Center, Mountain View, CA. author. Email: phayes@coginst.uwf.edu. 0004-3702/98/$ - see front matter 0 1998 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOOO4-3702(98)00052-6 266 G. LaFortr et al. /Art~ficid Intrlligenc~r 104 (IOYHI 265286 this one particularrecent based on Giidel’s incompleteness showing after deeper examination that some apparently argument against it, and to show why this, or any similar argument theorem, cannot succeed. Part of our case will involve lead intuitive claims about consistency and self-knowledge to some very unintuitive conclusions. 2. The Penrose arguments sentence in question. Penrose’s key idea is essentially the same as that of the philosopher J.R. Lucas in [6], an article which has attracted responses from several writers over the last thirty-five years (for in [ 11, and Lewis in [4,5]). In brief, Lucas argued as follows. Godel’s example, Benacerraf theorem shows that, given any formal system, there is a true sentence which incompleteness the formal system cannot prove to be true. But since the truth of this unprovable is proved as part of the incompleteness theorem, humans cue prove the sentence Hence, human abilities cannot be captured by formal systems. At the beginning of his first book [7], Penrose explains into his of strong AI” on project by hearing “extreme AI opinions” television. Since then he has elaborated and extended his argument, defended it against many criticisms, and produced various forms and versions of it; indeed, his second book was written as a response in his first book. In subsequent discussions he has produced yet a third version of the argument, claiming criticisms of the second; but this suffers from essentially arguments which a mathematical for a vaguer notion the philosophical burden. It is clear that Penrose, hypothesis, view he finds offensive. When one club breaks, he picks up a new one. that it avoids the the same basic problems. All these to is switched (such as argument, computational or .sound) which is used to carry result applies (such as prooA computable or satisjable) shell game, in which a precisely defined notion is not reporting a discovery but searching like many critics of the computationalist to criticisms of the arguments involve a kind of intellectual expressed by “proponents that he was “goaded” to help him refute a for a weapon the It is ironic theorems being cited here-notably, that ultimately out of the foundational to come to terms with the unpalatable results-arose mathematics Penrose boasts of using [9]) is not able to cope with the complexities of self-reference. Hilary Putnam Penrose’s does not seem to be a complete statement of the fundamental argument. crisis that finally forced philosophy of (which arising from puzzles [lo] and others [2] have already pointed out some of technical errors, and he has conceded several of the technical points, but there problems with this kind of Godel’s incompleteness fact that untutored intuition Benacerraf in [l] made two points against the original Lucas argument, both of which we will develop more precisely here. The first focuses on the fact that in order to know the truth of the unprovable “Godel sentence”, one has to know that the formal system is consistent. The thesis that we humans, unlike the formal system, can know the truth of the system’s therefore, unprovable is that humans may be unable to know that they are consistent. Penrose, like many who think his finds this simply ridiculous; but we will show that it is more plausible argument persuasive, is central to the argument. An alternative conclusion, sentence G. LnForte et al. /Art$cial Intelligence 104 (1998) 265-286 267 than it may seem at first sight (for example, we will find inconsistencies published opinions) and does not have the dire intellectual consequences in Penrose’s own that he fears. ’ Benacerraf’s is given a clear definition, second point is that Lucas equivocates on the notion of proof. Once “proof the argument applies to humans as well. This point [lo], and we will make it are very weak and plausible. While this objection, we will show that he can do and in in philosophy of mathematics for humans” was repeated against Penrose by both Boolos [2] and Putnam again here in more detail, to show how its assumptions Penrose believes himself so only by adopting psychology. rather extraordinary to have overcome positions 2. I. The hare Giidel argument is also strong enough these words mean something Godel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem can be stated informally to prove its own consistency, unless as the claim that no set of axioms for arithmetic which is strong enough to prove certain basic facts reasonable it is actually about numbers is not obvious, but arises inconsistent. The connection between arithmetic and computation and “prove” mean in the statement of Gbdel’s theorem. from what the words “reasonable” like “able to be listed by a program” and “derive Essentially, to a formal proof procedure”, which is itself a kind of algorithm. The basic according is an axiom intuition since there is no way in principle of or not, a proof system resolving disputes about whether something follows from it or not. Thus, the theorem can be viewed, crudely, as saying that no consistent algorithm can produce a proof of its own consistency. This gives at least some indication why this theorem to be relevant is that without some way of objectively checking whether something is essentially unreasonable, to the computationalist is often thought hypothesis. theorem that the halting problem theorem, but rather an easier of the halting problem has a mirror In fact, Penrose does not actually use Godel’s to work with in practice, and every ‘Godelizing’ result is unsolvable. argument image using Godel’s actual for both our involved only in the original theorem. To keep the discussion manageable, we will follow Penrose by inspired by Godel, namely, Turing’s This turns out to be simpler the unsolvability using theorem. On the other hand, notions discussion incompleteness using the unsolvability while talking as though we have been using Godel’s theorem the rest of the time. We will be careful to have some precise correlation of everything we are saying with the bare Turing theorem rather than the richer Godel result. and Penrose’s, and these notions are explicitly in the most technical parts of our discussion, and truth are important of the halting problem like consistency We will first present a clean mathematical proof of the main result, without any added claims and only then introduce and discuss to Penrose. His discussion mixes formal and pre- in a way that seems quite natural, but that leads to is bound to lead this way. assumptions, philosophical which make the result seem so significant formal notions from the very beginning confusion. We will now introduce some of the standard terminology In fact, we intend to show just how such a procedure and notation which computability the philosophical ’ For example: “if our mathematical reasoning were indeed fundamentally unsound, then the whole editice 01 scientific understanding would come crashing to the ground!” [Xl. 268 G. LaForte et rd. /Art&id Intelligence 104 (1998) 265-286 theorists use. (This is for the sake of convenience nonmathematical are not doing anything unusual.) reader to bear with us, and the mathematical and brevity of expression, so we ask the reader to be assured that we A process the computable thesis, we can identify to list the set of all programs that can be specified precisely by rules defines a computable function. Adopting Church’s functions with the inputs and outputs of programs on Turing machines. Other formalisms could be used; all that matters for the arguments here is that it is possible in a natural way, assigning to each of them a so-called Godel number, or index, based on its place in the to refer to programs; we will call it the standard list. This enables us to use numerals enumeration. We will refer to the result of running a particular program on a particular input by using letter @‘, so that @(e. x) denotes running program e (in the standard enumeration) on the integers. We write @(e, x) J, (‘@(e, x) converges’) e outputs a value, or halts, on input x, and @(e, x) f (‘@(e, x) diverges’) program fails to terminate when given x as input. on input x. dj is then a partial function to denote that program number to mean that the (if it exists) of the Greek the result relation-in if and only Computations these sequences if there is no k such that T(e, x, k)). in a further enumeration. Hence we can Godel number are simply finite sequences of machine states which can themselves be in a enumerated computable way, and define the T-predicate due to Kleene: T(e, x, k) means that @(c, x)J and k is (the index of) that computation. So @(e, x)J, if and only if 3k(T(e, x, k)), and @(e, x)t to show that other words one can easily define a Turing machine T is itself a computable which decides for any three numbers e, x, and k whether or not T(e, x, k) holds. This is an important relation: for any program e and input x, given that T(e, x, k) is true, we can recover the output of the e-th program on x by just looking at the last state listed in the sequence number k. like 3k(T(e. x, k)) is said to be computubly enumeruble, since a machine can be A relation all the pairs (e, x) such that 3k(T(e. x, k)). This machine, or specified which enumerates that goes on for ever, turning out the pairs program, can be thought of either as something the in succession; or alternatively nth pair in the infinite sequence and then terminates. fact, since it means that in some sense T is a universal computable as a Turing machine which, given a number n, returns It is possible This is all the terminology needed part of Penrose’s to state the purely mathematical is taken from Turing, but uses ideas from Godel’s proof of his first relation which theorem. Suppose A(e. x) is any computably enumerable argument, which incompleteness determines correctly whether or not computations fail to halt. It then follows that: VeVx(A(e, x) + @(e, x)f). (1) Now consider the diagonulizution of A, i.e., the relation A(x, x). Clearly, from (l), Vx(A(x, x) =+ @(x.x)t) Since A is computably and being a computably which enumerates such programs. enumerable, it is straightforward enumerable relation of one variable, it; and this must have an index no in the standard enumeration to check that A(x, x) is as well; there must be a program of all In other words, there is some no such that Vx(A(x, x) u @(no, x)4). (3) Now, however, consider a second diagonalization by (2), @(no. no)?, but then lA(nu, ~0) by Eq. (3). That is, A(770.7~) negation: to @(no, no)?. computation-@(rzu. so A(nu. no) must be false. But then -A(r70, It follows that A is incomplete, by setting x to be nu. If A(nu, no), then, its own no); which, by (3), is equivalent in the sense that there is a nonterminating it fails to detect. no)-which implies To this point, we have been careful not to introduce anything the least bit controversial. So we feel comfortable stating what we know so far as a well-known theorem. Theorem (Turing. after Godel). Let A be ~rn.~ computably rnumeruhle relation such that VrVx-(A(r. X) =+ @(e. A-)?). If‘170 is the inde.a of A in the enumeration @. then Cp (170, r70) f und -A(rzo. no). fail to halt in exactly enumerable can understand him Roger-who to anti-computationalists like Penrose this relation R were to determine those cases in which Roger does not halt. If there were such an R. then in which case, by the theorem the theorem, he But now, since Roger knows 170, Now, why does this theorem seem so significant and Lucas? Consider a human mathematician--call argument clearly. Suppose some computably correctly whether or not computations himself can prove its diagonalization just stated, @(no. no) t and -R(n().nu). knows but that R cannot determine power to prove computations is computably enumerable is false. that the computation would certainly have an index, leads to a contradiction; that @(n(~.no)t is true. This seems to show that he can prove that @(nu.nu)t. this; so R cannot, contrary not to halt. Thus the assumption to assumption, have Roger’s that Roger’s knowledge hypothesis and so the computationalist This is what Penrose calls the “bare Code1 argument”, used in [7]. Later, in [SJ, it was to refer not to any particular human’s ability. but to the accumulated wisdom of modified the entire human race, i.e., the set of all humanly-accessible methods; and his conclusion then is that no algorithm can fully encompass the set of all humanly-uccessible methods fi~r ascertaining muthemuticul is closely ttxth. We will discuss this weaker claim later. theorem, which related to Godel’s original Turing’s proof in arithmetic rather than detecting non-termination. provability in turn to the liar paradox, which arises when we allow sentences truth. An informal account of Godel’s theorem is obtained by modifying then becomes an intuitive refer to its own provability, version of Giidel’s emphasizes how easily a careless use of the argument may produce a paradox rather than a conclusion. and how much care must be exercised in this area. Intuition does not make the liar paradox go away. As we will show. the concept of “humanly knowable methods” sentence. 3 This familiar observation rather than its truth. The liar sentence in reasoning “intuitively” true-but-unprovable leads directly to paradox. referred to Both of these are related to refer to their ow’n to the liar sentence ’ Ciidel‘s technical achievement was to show how thi\ intuition could be mapped into arithmetic. so that the entire apparatus of grammatical well-t’ormednes? and derivability could be recast as arithmetic truths. In modern terminology. we mipht say that arithmetic support\ surprisingly rich opportunities for creative hacking. 3. Two objections to the argument Many objections above which were first made by Benacerraf can be given to Penrose’s argument, but we will focus here on the the argument as two mentioned originally presented by Lucas [6]. Similar points have been made by other reviewers of Penrose’s books [2], although we will develop in a rather different way to show how they are closely related. the objections [l] against + @(r.x)f). is, we have The first objection That that our own computations concerns knowledge of consistency. For us to be able to prove that for is to know this, wr must also prove (or know) that A is a .sound method it claims that a computation to know fail to halt: whenever then in fact that computation does not terminate. An alternative like Roger (or, perhaps, resolution the entire the soundness of the algorithm A that embodies his this ridiculous, but we will show that that @(no, no)? as above, and hence VeVx(A(e,x) deciding nonterminating, of the contradiction human mathematical it is more plausible abilities. Penrose apparently considers than it might at first seem. race) is unable that a human is therefore to establish thinker Naturally, the force of this technical objection relies on the human notion of soundness it seems, believes something describable the same sort of thing as that of a machine, namely in a being computable way. Penrose, that we have access to an intuitive notion of soundness which avoids the limitations of the machine notion, yet can still be used freely in reasoning about more precisely specified notions of soundness. This is the reason for our discussion of what we have called the second objection to Penrose’s claims. We wish to more fully exhibit the fact that any such argument applies just as well to human thinkers as it does to machines. that the set of algorithms sentences, and even the set of possible mathematical in the required sense. The last step in Penrose’s argument can then be taken in one of two ways. If one insists that Roger really does have this insight which is forbidden to him, we simply have an epistemic version of the liar paradox. An alternative conclusion, however, is that the act of understanding proof of the unprovable the Turing proof may not in itself constitute having a mathematical sentence. We will return to this point later. but, as we point out below, the set of possible mathematical insights, It uses the “formality” of the system only to establish is also enumerable is enumerable; Penrose knows about the first objection, yet he has failed to adequately answer it. When this reply was first made that what was known by us and not in principle knowable by the machine A was not the fact that @(no, no)?, but rather that $‘A is accepted as sound, then @(no. no)? must be accepted as well. to him in [2], his response (p. 693) was to claim There is a clear distinction between the unprovable that this follows from the soundness of the algorithm, which is simply the assertion relation A is an accurate predictor of non-termination. @(e. x)?)): i.e., the sentence sentence @(no, no) f , and the claim that the (VeVx(A(e, x) =+ @(no. no)? (4) G. LaFortr et ul. /Art$cial lntrlligerzce 104 (l99H) 265-286 (VeVx(A(e. x) =+ @(r,x)f)) =+ @(no, no)?. 271 (5) (5)-in confuses enumerable sets include for any computably it. However, Penrose is quite wrong here. There relation A, and many computably that A cannot possibly have access fact, (5) is a theorem of Peano Arithmetic the theorems of these two claims, using to) “@(no, no)f” when describing what the machine A would then @(no, no)?” when describing and using “if A is sound, that we must assume, accessible In several passages Penrose seems to confuse the meanings of these formulae. For example, to (5). whereas we can, since we have he claims is absolutely no reason why proved A cannot incorporate enumerable Peano Arithmetic. His discussion of this issue continually (some locution equivalent not be able to determine what we are able as a prerequisite that if it could be captured by an mathematical algorithm A, that algorithm would be sound. We do not find this plausible, but notice that it would not constitute a mathematical proof even if one were to accept this conclusion, of the soundness of A. In order to reach the contradiction argument, believe that this can be established mathematically, fact. Matters of faith are not considered truth. for establishing required by the bare Gijdel it is not enough for Roger merely to believe that he is consistent: he must also i.e., that he knows it to be a provable of our mathematical methods to any rational discussion, is consistent, that the sum total of humanly to determine. For example, to be consequences in [8] he argues and therefore knowledge between The distinction to trust one’s intuition. clear and sharp. However, (4) and (5) is clear and can be rigorously seem to be intuitively difficult established. The is less clear, unfortunately. The ideas of truth and analogous distinction made in English this is an area where it is consistency notoriously It is easy to explain how we might get an informal notion of soundness or truth which avoids trouble most of the time. We come across statements made in various contexts; from “outside” and intuitions, we count some as as it were, and comparing the meaning of the statements, or knowing what the “true”. This involves understanding these intended model is to which they are to be compared. The standard way of discussing matters is to adopt this point of view, speaking about a language and its model, adopting the standpoint of a meta-language in which to make assertions about truth in the model. As long as one argues in this way, no trouble arises. No inconsistency many statements gets the feeling that one has a general applied to one’s own utterances arises from believing like VeVx(A(e, x) + @(e. x ) T). as lorzg as A is not onrsdfl and so one idea of what “soundness” means which can even be in a reasonable way; but there an error lurks. ’ looking at these statements them with our perceptions One can show quite rigorously itself be sound. The computable to be sound cannot procedure considering, deducing function, first-order that Penrose’s notion of what it is to know oneself that the indexed by e is sound is, in the context of the diagonal arguments we have been to make decisions by merely from this formula. This procedure defines a computable first-order consequences f which takes a program j’(e) for a program which uses logic and the soundness assertion for procedure e to make decisions about which to use the formula Vx(@(e, x)& + @(.u. x)?) analogue of believing index e to the index the meaning of “e is sound” , since it represents programs halt on their own arguments. This is a more precise description of what Penrose refers to as “automating Godelization”. We might think of ,f’ as being the formal analogue of understanding the notion of asserting what follows from e’s soundness. So, for a sound e, ,f(e) gives a sound procedure, while If we look at f’ in this fashion, we for an unsound e. j’(e) gives an unsound procedure. can get a clear idea of what it would mean to use one’s understanding of the meaning of soundness in one’s reasoning. function that something indexed by f(e()). Now, by a classical follows from its soundness result due to S.C. Kleene, like f which operates on program the (Second) Recursion Theorem, every indices has a fixed point. Applying recursive indexed by eu is the same this result to f, we obtain a number ea, such that the program In other words, ea is just the sort of thing for which as the program asserting that thing; we might call it a Penrosian ideal. However, the diagonal argument used in the basic proof shows that ee cannot really work in the way that it should. For, the program indexed by ,f(eu) converges on any input y for which the axiom “Vx(@(eg. x)4 =+ @(x. _r)t)” can be used to prove that @(_v. y)T. A particular consequence of this axiom is, of course. that @(e(). eo)J =+ @(eo. e(j)?, from which it follows that @(e(), e())f. So, @(,f’(eo), e(j)&, by the same program. that since ee is the fixed-point of f obtained by the Recursion Theorem. Hence @(ee. e(j) = @(f’(eu), ea)J. In other words, .f’(e()) indexes a program that is unsound, since it is wrong about itself, asserting of itself that it diverges on eg. when in fact, it converges on eg. ,f’s very definition. Recall, however, is the same as merely asserting ,f’(e()) and e() index inconsistent, The algorithm need not be explicitly since this would involve being able to to use prove that f(ea) and ea yield the same output when applied to eu. If we allow f’(~) in its proofs from the soundness of e(), then this would follow from the Peano Arithmetic theorem. In fact, however, we merely allowed constructive nature of the proof of Kleene’s ,f to construct programs which use elementary logic, as well as the minimal amount of arithmetic needed to define the notions J. f, and the enumeration @. Obviously we need some weak theory like this merely to express the limited idea of soundness which we are using here. The point of involving the Recursion Theorem in this discussion any precise use of even a very limited notion of soundness which is unsound if applied too generally, first-order of soundness. A more expressive procedure, and probably an inconsistent one. in particular to have a language logic and enough arithmetic language will result even more quickly is to make it clear that is bound to lead to a procedure to itself. To repeat: all that ,f uses is in which to express the concept in an unsound describe intuition, inevitably it formally-that show that this process What we have done here is take Penrose’s is, mathematically-and leads to a contradiction. Now, it could be argued that this makes Penrose’s case seem as strong as possible, since it shows that no consistent procedure can in any sense know that it is sound. Since, according to Penrose, we humans must assume this fact shows the to formal definition. However, we believe such a position superiority of informal in particular. The to be at odds with the very nature of science in general, and mathematics is to avoid the contradictions which arise whole purpose of introducing intuitive notions. Formal here simply means from using “obvious” to the intuitions and unequivocal. The formal difficulty applies just as inevitably that we do have such knowledge, facts about our natural, formal methods intuition precise G. LaFortr vt cd. /Art$cinl Intelligencr 104 (199X) 265-286 213 which inspired as mathematical the formal description, if those intuitions are precise enough to be regarded in nature. 3.2. Knowing oneself to be consistent Rather than merely stamping our feet, while maintaining loudly that precise definitions given by the recursion theorem- insight, we prefer to point out how it is that our minds are in the same position with respect to the truth as machine procedures are. For it are better than ineffable essentially turns out that even the strongest kind of limitation-that applies to us as well. At first glance, implausible, theorem? as machines, is the claim the limitations this may appear reasoning by the GiideVIuring the theorem, one merely has the result in principle by some particular mathematician, relies on to give his argument reason effectively force. But how implausible even given If one supposes and it is this very implausibility which that Penrose imposed on mathematicians the output of program machine say A to be identical with that producible Evariste Galois, and then applies that there is some number no which Galois could never have proved his methods would not halt on, yet for which in fact his methods would never halt. This claim might seem to involve a certain amount of hubris, since it appears to say that anyone who has read the arguments above has access to a mathematical really a misinterpretation mathematician asserting Galois’ methods were sound, be able to prove that his own methods are sound. It is quite possible may have come to realize lurking, and to realize that for him to claim to be able to mathematically consistency would be contradictory, methods are non-algorithmic that Galois could never have had, but this is in another to that Galois himself that this number nu existed, to see the potential contradiction of the situation. While there is no formal contradiction establish his own to prove that Galois’ and why. How this is supposed there is one in Galois claiming is a little mysterious. insight There including implausible is really nothing about even a genius some version of the induction just like Galois committing list this kind of inconsistency. We can easily imagine him writing down some computable that of truths about numbers, scheme, claiming set of truths, and everything he believed about numbers was based on this well-behaved that therefore, of course, his beliefs about numbers were consistent. Taking then asserting in an inconsistent these actions would themselves be enough theory. In practice. the actual derivation of the inconsistency would have been very unlikely to ever happen, unless Galois, anticipating GBdel’s insight, had happened to notice the key fact that statements about numbers can be encoded as numbers. to make Galois a believer Interestingly, when this fact was noticed, the very two logicians whose results we have to human mathematical from it. Godel accepted been considering drew quite different conclusions of a machine which might be equivalent could never prove to be sound. Turing, however, according that the theorem indicates that human mathematical that we know ourselves since we do in fact believe would show us to be unsound machines of precisely exist by the recursion whereas human brains are not the product of such conscious design. there might indeed be intuition, but which we to Penrose, actually argued to be unsound, terms, this to to be sound. In technical the self-referential theorem. Since machines can be explicitly designed to be consistent, type guaranteed the possibility is bound intuition to inconsistent intended as ironic understatement, some sense in which our minds are necessarily different from the procedures of consistent machines, but equivalent glance, and Penrose evidently obviously somewhat implausible technique can extract contradictions the reader that it is more plausible this argument argument at first ones. This claim may seem outrageous takes it to be. He describes Turing’s view, with what is as being one which “many might regard as a proof from ideas in Penrose’s own writings might persuade than it might seem. Ironically, Penrose considers almost that his standpoint.” However, the ease with which the diagonalization in 18. pp. 81-821 (reply self-referential to “Q6”), but apparently is paradoxically fails to notice at this point. The reader should note Penrose’s whole aim claiming shows how likely it is that minds are subject to the limitations removes the force of his claims. that this is not merely an objection of the tu quoqur sort. are different by truths which machine procedures cannot. Our account that affect machines, and so is to show that minds and machine procedures that minds can produce It is worthwhile to go a little further and examine what these limitations might add up to a proposed mathematical for a machine. as we have just done in the case of a human mathematician. in practice robot whose method Consider summed up in a program. To keep things simple, assume numerical encoding of> a sentence and returns a truth-value, hence is located somewhere of the robot’s mathematical p just when A(r. p). We know there is a truth-A(ro, prove. truth can be takes (the so it has one parameter and includes all among other things, so that the robot can prove to for ascertaining that this algorithm in our enumeration, knowledge, say number r. This algorithm our robot is unable ro)-which index. therefore r() is no longer an accurate index of the robot’s own algorithm. in a new such algorithm, one with a different A real robot, however, unlike a formal system, is capable of learning new truths, either truth. When it learns by being told them or by being shown new methods for establishing a genuinely new truth, its repertoire of truth-ascertaining methods enlarges. Its abilities are then embodied Suppose that the robot learns the truth A(ro. r’(j) and accepts this as a known the If we dramatize that says “You cannot know this that says this sentence”. But this of course can understand why it is true. as we learn new that we to understand [8, p. 78. ‘Q2’], but replies that it actually learning. to a specification fact which can properly be used in mathematical proofs. Now it has learned something, number Gfidel’s theorem as a robot being faced with a sentence sentence”, we can see that in this case the robot is instead faced with something “Before you learned be believed quite consistently, Indeed. this seems to mirror our own human situation quite accurately: truths, we are able to see the truth of others; and we can come were previously mistaken. Penrose mentions “a changing algorithm would need some specification changes”. This misunderstanding The learning process of what is learned, and the one thing which is central specified in advance: whether what is learned will always lead to a sound procedure. itself must be specified, but this does not amount could be corrected by reading about machine to the discussion here cannot be and one can even consistently it, you couldn’t have known as to the rules whereby this objection The robot (more exactly, the robot’s new algorithm) now has a new Gijdel sentence, of course, which it is unable to prove, but which (in principle) we could tell it. and SO this the truth of its Gadel sentence process might continue. But at each stage. the act of learning is sufficient abilities. to change the algorithm which correctly describes the robot’s mathematical is computable, this true sentence, this computation may be beyond truth. And note, it is not enough in question. Such a proof must exhibit it would be able to conclude without any further One might object that if the robot, like Roger, fully understands as presented by Lucas and Penrose allows one to conclude only the import of the bare input that a sentence is computable thereby in contradiction. Care is needed here, however, for while the robot’s own resources. Godel argument, exists which is true but which it is unable to establish; and since this sentence from a specification of A, the robot should be able to discover becoming once more enmeshed the sentence The argument certain sentence e.xists which is true (but unprovable); but this does not amount of the sentence its particular Godel sentence follow simply from one’s grasp of the Turing/Godel the discovered sentence a complete description of one’s own algorithmic an accurate and complete description, Godel sentence kind of self-knowledge, programs and of human beings: in fact, one conclusion results is that such self-knowledge it changes one, as it were, into something new. And again. we do not find this to be a surprising or implausible that a to a proof the actual sentence and establish to simply discover. or be told. one’s own to proof itself, one must also know that is the appropriate Giidel sentence, which requires having available that it is, indeed, the that the process used to compute is correct. This requires a very complete the capacity both of Al to be drawn from the Turing-Giidel can never be obtained, since the very act of obtaining in order to be persuaded of its truth in this way. For this conviction one that seems indeed to be quite beyond from this description of oneself techniques, knowing and knowing conclusion. individual mathematician’s methods are incapable This discussion should make it clear how Penrose’s argument cannot that any program. Of course, applying easily mathematician. This is the point of the imaginary is nothing lead to an unsound, and even inconsistent, about this. implausible in principle show of being performed by a the Kleene Recursion Theorem as we did earlier might like a human show that there situation of Galois-to that behaves program 3.3. The whole human ruce It is worthwhile then the robot is bound to discuss here in more detail what seems to be a possible escape route above, he claims for the current in [8] that if one substitutes robot, an algorithm consisting of every sound algorithm which to find itself back in a situation. For this seems to be an algorithm which we can prove to be sound, itself in contradiction. This that this robot’s since it looks as for Penrose. As mentioned algorithm of a mathematical the robot might ever use in the future, paradoxical yet which the robot can never believe sound without involving route can easily be closed off by merely pointing out that it is evidence mind though the robot should be able to achieve this insight about his future sound procedures in the same way in which we do. In [8], Penrose this route, although he states it in the strongest possible way, in order to avoid the easy “different- mind” objection which we have just mentioned. from each of ours; nevertheless, takes what is essentially it seems troubling, is different (in fact, throughout There Penrose attempts an end-run past this entire discussion by referring not to the abilities of a single human or robot, but to the abilities of the entire human mathematical race throughout history every possible history, since the concept of humanly-knowable method includes propositions which never get enunciated by any actual if the world had allowed any human mathematician, then is that this totality of humanly- human knowable methods in nature. As we have for establishing hypothesis, but in any case, this noted, this is hardly a firm attack on the computationalist to reasoning human mathematicians” is faulty for a new reason: the central concept of “all the procedures available but which could have been proven, truth cannot be algorithmic [8, p. 73) is incoherent. them.) His conclusion to actually consider Much of Penrose’s discussion is devoted to the claim that we have some idea of this method. and that we actually know it to be sound. This last is just the seemingly-obvious claim that if a mathematician then what he decides merely means that if some mathematician is unsolvable reasonable, but it immediately uses the correct method to decide some truth about numbers. this that some arithmetic problem for II. This may sound for a natural number n, then it really is unsolvable leads to paradox. is really true. In the weak context we have been considering, decides correctly It is quite easy to define a list of all the mathematical problems that might in they might occur. Since, at least according in this list there must occur the problem of using for instance, order mathematicians ideas alphabetically, to any mathematician. We could, by their genetic codes, and then order their potential principle occur lexicographically to Penrose, we or by the time at which truths”, know what is meant by “the method mathematicians to somewhere for the number 11. So far, nothing we decide that the nth problem to know have said should be the least bit controversial: something about this method, and even claims that we all know this method to be sound. The list of arithmetic problems quite obviously exists, apart from any claims about which problems are actually on it-there is clearly some fact of the matter about which problems can occur, and there are many ways to list them in a well-dehned manner. after all. Penrose himself claims use to decide mathematical in the list is unsolvable these correct methods to solve the rruth problem It should be clear where this is bound to end up, however. For if this problem of showing is the Ir()th problem on the list. then, if mathematicians were to use correct unsolvability is methods for /I(). Since these methods are correct, this is tmpossible. So in fact the rluth unsolvable problem must be unsolvable on no. But since, as Penrose claims. everyone knows our method to be correct. that the n()th problem this argument has already decided correctly is unsolvable on 1~). thereby solving the n()th problem on I~(I. by definition of fZ(J. Here we have a paradoxical contradiction for /I[), they would show that the n()th problem derived from no special assumptions at all. Notice that the reasoning one goes through here is no different from that which we (and the earlier theorem, and in our discussion of the Godelization ,f. We point this out to make it clear that we nowhere use any incorrect method is Penrose) used to establish procedure of inference. or any sort of equivocation or other confusion. The form of this argument identical This paradox arises once we arc willing talk about “the method mathematicians phrase simply cannot bt s given an exact meaning which mirrors to use to correctly decide problems”. Like “truth”, this in every way its informal to the completely acceptable ones above, yet it leads to an evident contradiction. to accept the idea that it is actually meaningful G. LnFortr et cd. /Art@iul Intelligenc~e 104 (1998) 265-286 277 use, and assuming the liar paradox. that it can leads one directly into the kind of incoherence familiar from than rather the sum community, total of all the methods that of the methods available The problem here lies in Penrose’s use of the notion of the methods available to to an thinks he is arguing that to every available is identical with a particular algorithm, but rather that for any individual his methods are identical with a program. Penrose slips between the entire mathematical individual mathematician. The claim of those against whom Penrose is surely not in principle mathematician these mathematician. meanings apparently without noticing. For example, his exposition of the basic argument in [X. pp. 73-761 begins by assuming human mathematicians”-the mathematicians To see the logical error here, consider universe, nevertheless to that “Human truth”. that while no saltshaker contains all the salt in the all is crucial are not using a knowably sound algorithm saltshakers may contain nothing but salt. all the procedures available to ascertain mathematical that A “encapsulates to the argument-but concludes enumerable that @(e. n)f. theory proves those cases in which in principle To see why this distinction is important, suppose B is the set of all possible pairs In fail to halt in it is possible that the computation theory which proves enumerable (P. n) such that some sound computably other words, the relation determines correctly whether or not computations exactly enumerable computably which case, by the theorem stated above, @(no. no)? and -B(q). no). Clearly. computably such that B(e. n). together with the statement computably since it is the sum total of all such sound theories. This contradicts B’s soundness even its consistency). Hence, B cannot be computably does not halt. If B were itself then its diagonalization would certainly have an index, ~0, in if B were the theory generated by all expressions @(e. rl)f that @(no. r~o)T, would also be sound, and by an obvious program. But then, by definition of B, B(no. ~0). (in fact. to construct a sound computably enumerable. and sound, enumerable enumerable correctly is This shows that any computably enumerable relation A, which determines this. It follows cannot be computations-an fail to halt, cannot be identical with what in principle whether or not computations correctly determinable by computations not to halt, since some computation can determine that @(no, rzo)?. where no is A’s index. and A cannot determine that what can in principle be done by computations cannot be identical with any particular computation. At this point, if we argued as Penrose does, we would draw the conclusion that computations illegitimate all of human mathematical understanding be identical with the mathematical method used by any individual mathematician of the entire mathematical weaker method postulated stronger method. For Penrose’s arguments evident absurdity. This shows plainly how is identical with that machine operations cannot of particular humans. Clearly, since the is weaker than the sum total of the methods this that no algorithm can implement the that no algorithm can implement against Al to have any real force, he needs the claim than the claim it is to move from the conclusion that no machine operation is a stronger claim to the conclusion understanding community, the stronger claim, since the computationalist resulting individual machines. This does not imply that the theorems infinite sequence of all possible correct methods available from the correct methods of individual mathematicians hypothesis only claims to establish that the theorems can be reproduced by that can be produced using the to individual mathematicians is capable of producing formal system or machine. Although Penrose does not can be produced by a particular make his argument clear at this point, he seems to have been misled by his transparently carelessness with the notions of universal machines and enumerations. A universal machine that computes our is one which enumeration @ is such a machine, is that because we can define such machines, we could, at least in principle, which use the individual correct methods to have some putative computation this is false. in order of the totality of correct computational methods; but for example. What Penrose evidently believes through some device like time-sharing run the computations all computations; the machine is true of three integers i, when run with input j, produces To set the readers mind at ease, we can give a brief technical description of the true is easily constructed using Kleene’s T-predicate, i. j and k just when the the computation with index k. from T is to search for the least k state of affairs. Such a universal machine which is computable. The T-predicate algorithm with index All one need do to produce any computation whatsoever such that T(e, n, k). If such a k is found, one then looks at the final state of the computation encoded not partially computable using T, however, as our argument apparent contradiction make up B does have a program-index is an unsolvable problem that are sound in the relevant sense. Penrose has missed the crucial point-in this super-computation, we would have to be able to give a method for distinguishing sound methods from the unsound ones, and this is in fact an unsolvable problem. ’ in k and reads the result of @(e, n) from that. The relation B described earlier is to the that goes to it to determine exactly which numbers e are indices for programs order to run the lies in the fact that while each individual procedure e which can be used by T to run the procedure, shows. The solution 3.4. On knowing ourselves At this point, we have shown as plainly as possible that Penrose’s arguments do not to them. He has not produced unassailable have the kind of force which he attributes mathematical proofs of his claims, but rather arguments of an ordinary kind which some that humans may find more or less plausible. Notice that our second point against Penrose, seem to be subject to the same limitations to a point where it can be viewed as another aspect of the first point-that is, that the extra assumption into inconsistency. With is needed to force the algorithm under consideration of soundness that humans our stories about Galois and the robot, we have tried to show that it is plausible might use a program to be sound. In fact. the conclusion of the previous discussion could be summed up in the fact that no matter how these alternatives might both seem to be, we have to accept one of them, since implausible to deny them both leads to a paradox. that is either (1) unsound or (2) not known that machines are, has been developed Some readers may feel that some error must have been committed in the discussion above-after they are being reasonable, all, it is surely just common sense that reasonable people can perceive that and so the reduction of this to a paradox must be based on 5 This essentially argument about B above. This should be clear, since if the problem were solvable, the paradoxical B above would be explicitly definable. The fact can, of course, be proved directly using the same sort ofdiagonalization we have been using throughout. from the paradoxical follows G. LuForte et 01. /Artificial lntr//i,qrnce 104 (1998) 265-286 279 sleight-of-hand. But the actual explanation some sort of intellectual belief that we know precisely what we are doing when we practice mathematics particularly magical, and. although the process may be a little involved, analyzing in some detail should alleviate explained. for this common sense is nothing this issue the feeling that there is some trickery here that needs to be Penrose discusses in the third chapter of [81. He distinguishes three these matters that one who believes that some algorithm underlies mathematical procedure A that underlies mathematical understanding and that it is the algorithm underlying mathematical is con- under- possible viewpoints understanding might take: (i) The algorithmic sciously knowable, standing is knowable. (ii) The algorithmic procedure A that underlies mathematical understanding is con- sciously knowable, but that it is the algorithm underlying mathematical understand- ing is not knowable. (iii) The algorithmic procedure A that underlies mathematical understanding is not is unknowable. consciously knowable, and the fact that it is the algorithm underlying mathematical understanding Penrose ignores underlies mathematical the algorithm underlying mathematical task for this by Putnam that some algorithmic procedure A that understanding might be unknowable, but the fact that it is indeed is knowable. He has been taken to understanding in our view. logical possibility, in [lo], correctly, the remaining Penrose argues against case (i) as follows (p. 131): if such an A exists, it is clear that to underlie mathematical that A is a sound algorithm, since it is known that @(no, no) fails to halt and that A can never determine that some computation @(no, no) fails to halt, but A can never determine to be sound. By the theorem above, the soundness of that is believed. and the soundness of A is believed, this to be the algorithm one must believe understanding, which is believed A entails @(no. ~10) fails to halt. Since the theorem it must also be believed truth. all of which contradicts A being believed, much less known, underlying mathematical mathematical to be true is not the same as to believe statement to be true by mathematical methods. To give a real-world example, most mathematicians believe the axiom of choice to be true, yet few believe it to be possible by mathematical methods. The situation know that A underlies mathematical long way from believing take to know that @(no. no) fails to halt. its truth the same here. Although one might that A is sound, this is a and believe that one can SIIOW that A is sound, which is clearly what it would that to believe a it practice. 6 However, that one can establish it is important understanding, to establish is exactly to realize Penrose’s tendency between the sentences that we are consistent, walls of science will tumble. Even if one accepts this plea, however, it hardly amounts is indicated quite clearly by his confusion to make this mistake (4) and (5). His argument is based on the claim that we must assume for if we are not, then the foundation of knowledge will fail and the to ‘Penrose expanded a\ we discussed above, mathematical this argument to emphasize in more detail that the “mathematical in his Psyche reply to Chalmers, being careful understanding” referred to was essentially there. “all truth that is knowable in principle”. We have already pointed out the technical error in this move. a mathematical than an explanation of truth. argument for our own consistency. It has more the flavor of a cry of faith 3.5. Whut does it mean to be fbmal? Here is the place to emphasize the difference between believing that what one says is show us that we formalizable It is a belief of a very strange and special kind, involving notions what we think is true-explicitly true and treating “what I say is true” as an axiom. The Godel arguments cannot use this belief-that in arithmetic. “true” which no one has given any convincing fact, all we know is that reliance on ordinary leads directly While this is surely now well established, we often ignore like “I” and In logic using the unrestricted concept of truth explanation of how to use in reasoning. it and refer to “truth” as in an argument to paradox. to define or formalize realm of mathematical to this single, absolute though the concept were clear. And Penrose believes that it is. He believes that mathematics describes a real, external, objective Platonic abstractions. On this view, the notions of truth and consistency have a meaning which quite transcends any local them. Our beliefs alter and change, and they may only be attempt an approximation truth which we all perceive more or less clearly and, as mathematicians, strive to see more clearly; but the subject matter of mathematics simply exists, abstract and eternal. But now, if one’s assertions and beliefs are to be judged by how close to this objective Platonic world one can make them, what can be made of someone who asserts, or even allows the possibility, From this perspective, of mathematical is evidently of reality claim that to assert something, are essentially meaningful mathematical assumption of the consistency of the speaker’s beliefs. that their own beliefs are inconsistent? such a position would seem to be an extreme kind of abdication to any kind impossible. One can see, therefore, how Penrose would be led to (4) with (5). From his perspective, assertions must be made within a framework which includes and to assert that it follows from one’s own consistency, to say the same thing, confusing since if one is inconsistent then conformity responsibility, all the This uncritical version of epistemological Platonism claims that any mathematical statement which one proves can be known by direct mathematical something, on this view, is simply plausible. Penrose amounts establish to showing a few pictures and making the fact that for every II b 0. intuition. To prove that it is true, and why. To make this claim “hexagonal” numbers, which in order to [g. p. 681 gives an example concerning some remarks about them to realize indicates to be that one can grasp this algebraic The point seems of visualization, which understanding. sound methods of mathematical preassigned precise description of what mathematicians In Penrose’s words, “part of my purpose here is to show that there are to some system of rules”. What Penrose misses here is that whenever one gives a instance, one does that are not ‘formalized’ fact by the “informal” means for mathematical that formalization is not necessary in a particular are saying according reasoning G. LaFwte et al. /Arti$cial lntrlligcnce 104 (1998) 265-286 281 effectively produce some formal rules. Calling an argument “formalizable” no more than calling arguments as his hexagonal number formalization. precisely with the mechanization Even such directly illustration are quite within the scope of computational concerned [3].) emerged intuitive processes an active subarea of AI has recently to amounts intuitive graphic it “precise and unambiguous”. of such directly geometric (Ironically, Although Penrose is clearly offended by the idea of a mathematical insight (specifically. system of rules, the Code1 to go (In fact, in Penrose’s own and limited by a “preassigned’ says nothing about preassignment. All that is needed for the argument his own) being circumscribed argument through is the existence of a formal system, not its pre-existence. Platonic view of mathematical reality, such things as formal systems, being mathematical in nature, have no temporal aspect to their existence at all.) All it requires to be preassigned is the standard ordering @; but this places no constraint upon the formal systems being just as the existence of a standard alphabetical ordering places no constraints considered, at all upon the possible the notorious lexical creativity of mathematicians we could even allow a countably infinite alphabet. and still have a predefined alphabetic ordering on all possible sentences.) The only substantive themselves are finite. But since requirement no matter how creative, can produce only a finite number of symbols any mathematician, in his or her lifetime, theorem’s this seems to place no real constraint on the undecidability range of applicability. if we take any argument offered by Penrose and ask him to make the meanings of the words in it quite clear (even using pictures and geometric intuitions will have formalized it sufficiently well to satisfy the conditions of his own argument. if he wishes) and to make all his assumptions quite explicit, for the proof to go through is that the sentences (In order to accommodate sentences of English. then by doing so he In particular, insisted in particular that graphical insight might truth, and this set of mental involve mental are not enumerable. in an internal continuum, which (unlike sentences) advantage by thinking to our point, and does not allow one to escape reals to any degree of approximation, from the original: so even countably many mathematicians One might reply that there is no limit to the range of mental devices that a mathematician insights may not be computable. might use to discover images For example, one reviewer constructed In response, we can point out that any diagram, mental or otherwise, can be imitated by to be one built on the computable perceptually indistinguishable could never reap an uncomputable case, this is irrelevant paradox. The formalization mathematician responsible mathematicians to and be willing to reveal to one in some claim that something to perform a inexplicable way. or that its truth will be obvious is not robust certain ritual, or even to look at a particular diagram change. Such claims are regularly made enough to survive a perceptually in human discourse, but we do not call this mathematics. And this requirement still applies even if the truth seems obvious to someone, unless that person is able to convey the grounds to the rest of the human race. Suppose, for example, that someone for his or her confidence is false. Such insight were to claim to qualify as is not available in a continuum. But in any the force of the the sentences uttered, or asserted. by the insights: and there is a standing condition on if challenged. its truth has been revealed to the rest of us: so. in order that her insight be considered to be able to actually express their meaning unambiguously if the reader is willing if the truth in question their assumptions, is true simply because that she could simply see that the axiom of choice in expressing mathematical It will never be enough only has to reproduce indistinguishable 282 G. LaFortr et cd. /Art$cial Intrlligencr IO4 (1998) 265-286 the claimant mathematics, we would require its being directly apparent as having been mathematically of assumptions and all that is needed for the Godel/Turing diagonalizations in spite of to her; and if she were unable to do so, it would not be regarded clarity and explicit declaration in the sense being used here, are all that we require to have a formalization established. Unambiguous to explain and justify this insight, to work. 3.6. Intuitive soundness and set theor? While Penrose’s arguments position concerning coherent philosophical will not attempt to refute this position, to the wealth of technical it is, and how ill-fitted which have been developed during this century. are faulty, his conclusions may be consistent with one truth. While we the nature of mathematical it is worth pointing out just how very idiosyncratic results in the foundations of mathematics imagines described is something It seems that what Penrose to the geometric visualization like the following. Through some of hexagonal process akin theories are sound, numbers, one can grasp that Peano Arithmetic as follows: since we know by intuition that there is a set of natural numbers, and we can perceive directly that each of the Peano axioms is true of these numbers, we know that these their consistency axioms are consistent to them also results in a sound theory and, even more, that the whole sequence statement of all such adjoinings will result in a sequence of sound theories; and this is a statement that none of the first-order arithmetic and, in fact, sound. We thus know that adjoining theories so generated can possibly and various stronger in his discussion imply. The process of making explicit Penrose’s hypothetical one. The work has already been done, since the entire argument Penrose thinking of in this context can be formalized mathematicians, method of constructing claim, a mathematical these arithmetical consistency of set theory itself is known in the same kind of transparent way. reasoning here does not have to be a merely is set theory. Since most to use the to establish know that all idea that the a formal proof of a statement they apparently believe theories are consistent. The problem arises in Penrose’s even if they are not themselves “formalists”, that they can in principle from the ZF axioms are at least willing in Zermelo-Frankel this: from inclined is different to accept lead directly in a way that is relevant explanation of why it is illegitimate In fact, the wide acceptance of set theory by mathematicians the to this very issue. similarly widespread acceptance of arithmetic that the very For what was discovered by Cantor, Russell, and others was just to contradictions. Nobody intuitions which we are naturally has ever given a convincing to refer to the set of all sets. We know that this is illegitimate because of Russell’s paradox, but we still lack an In fact, it is quite clear that in almost intuitive basis for the judgment every context where mathematicians using the axiom of Frege, which leads to paradox. Can we really believe unrestricted comprehension uses, say, the notion of the set consisting of all the that when a working mathematician that this analyst real-valued subsets of the set of differentiable actually goes through to be an object in the relevant way? And if not, then how plausible can the claim be that mathematicians are actually using sound methods which they krzow to be sound? reason about sets, they are psychologically the mental process of checking that this set is “small enough” functions on the reals, that it is illegitimate. G. L.aForte et al. /ArtiJicial Intelligence 104 (IYYh’) 265-286 283 it was recognized The set-theory axioms which encapsulate what we are willing to prove the results which were so dear, the ZF axioms were produced. to accept as “unassail- able”, in Penrose’s words, came about precisely because that the actual intuitions which mathematicians were using led to inconsistency. After analyzing what was In really needed what sense can we claim to know that these axioms are consistent? If we follow Penrose, this knowledge would be achieved by something akin to the geometric visualization which If this is the case, it seems clear that what is really he discusses in which a single known to be consistent is the finite second-order version of the axioms, takes the place of the infinitely many axioms of the replacement second-order statement scheme only arises as a techni- scheme. (This is nothing controversial. The replacement statement, and it seems more cal first-order approximation likely that what we believe rather than an infinite collection of sentences.) to the obvious second-order in the example mentioned. is itself a finite sentence For Penrose, to be consistent because the arithmetic axioms are known they are seen the natural numbers. To many, this in itself might to be true about the intended structure, seem to be illegitimate, since it is a little unclear how we as finite beings can see things to be true about the infinite object consisting of all the natural numbers. However, the fact that we have accepted in our set theory gives us at least a means of talking about this infinite object which we believe makes sense, and so this claim might not be too implausible. is very different. The smallest object which could be a model of these axioms has the size of an inaccessible cardinal. 7 For one to intuit the soundness of the set-theory axioms in a natural way involves having an intuition of the whole universe below an inaccessible set-theory axioms, the situation In the case of the second-order the axiom of infinity cardinal. is so simple, it seems reasonable that mathematicians in the case of the natural numbers to zero. In the case of the inaccessible have a clear idea of everything produced by applying Such an intuition would be very different from the intuition the it is not that is involved, but (among others) the power-set operation. This than that of adding one to an integer. To form idea of the set of all subsets of an infinite set, even the set of natural numbers, that there is an infinite set of is that one should natural numbers. All that is involved have an idea of the smallest set closed under the relatively simple operation of taking the successor of a number. Because the successor operation to think successor operation successively the successor operation is a much harder process to grasp intuitively a complete would involve, this set. To know it would be to know whether not; and far from knowing this. we know that we cannot know it. One of the significant achievements of logic in this century was Cohen’s development of forcing, by which one can show that the power sets of infinite sets can be consistently taken to be almost anything. that even the simplest, most natural, question The method of forcing shows very clearly its cardinality. But nobody knows the cardinality of hypothesis were true or for instance, knowing the continuum cardinal, ’ For those who know some set theory: in the case of the first-order axioms, there are, of course, countable is consistent, but these cannot possibly be the intended model m Penrose’s sense. since the models if the theory the notion fails to be interpretation of “uncountable” absolute. The same holds for all first-order models below the first inaccessible, essenhally because they have the to make sense of wrong notion of their own cardinality. This is why we have to adopt the second-order Penrose’s claims. The problem does not arise for the inaccessible, cannot be proved in the theory. smce the existence of the inaccessible in such a model is the wrong one-in set-theorist axioms jargon. to intuitive them to the formal the subject-matter about the power-set operation cannot be inferred nature of sets which can be expressed from any current in the language of set theory. ’ intuitions about the that we were unable to tell how much bigger the successor of a number was than itself, or even whether or not it was finitely bigger. Would we be likely to claim Imagine the number that we had a clear intuition of “the smallest set closed under the successor operation’? The answer is obviously no. Yet this is just the sort of thing we have to accept if we want to claim we have an intuition that set theory has a model. Notice, however, that Penrose cannot stop even there. Whatever his claims and satisfiability; of the satisfiability to have knowledge that this knowledge that can be used in a mathematical in the same way other mathematical like that of set theory. and to claim further knowledge are, it is clear that something must connect these are, after all, themselves mathematical notions of consistency of an of a part of mathematics. But to claim is itself axiom system argument of the kind we have been about something considering, is to claim that one has, at the very least, knowledge of formal satisfiability. As pointed out, in the case of set theory, this claim involves the intuition of a very large infinite object. Worse yet, Penrose believes for him to treat his own soundness that it is legitimate facts are known. What this self-referential as known is that there is no way to stop. For now, the intuition of the notion of soundness means inaccessible cardinal, which provides a model for the ordinary set-theory axioms, is itself an intuition of an actual object, and so must be seen as existing in some model of still higher cardinality which cannot be seen to exist from the mere existence of the inaccessible. Then this model too must exist somewhere, and so on and on. Penrose’s claim, to the extent that it has any precise meaning, has to be understood as a claim that one can intuit the whole mathematical universe, no matter what that universe contains. And this seems unlikely to be the case. It is one thing to be an epistemological but the claim that we can have direct, unassailable inaccessible be likely to profess. Platonist about the natural numbers, about the structure of all intuitions that few mathematicians would reflects a degree of self-confidence cardinals Since an inaccessible cardinal can be proved to be what is needed to provide a model for our set-theoretic principles, yet such a thing seems to be “too big” for us to have a clear intuition of it, there might seem to be a mystery as to how we can accept our set theory as true. However, what we actually do here is clear. We apply our set-theoretic principles in ordinary contexts and then make a kind of leap of faith that there is actually a model of our natural axioms. in his conviction The difference between this and Penrose’s optimistic approach to mathematical that this is not a leap of faith, but a mathematical intuition is precisely truth which, like all the others, can be established mathematically. But surely the lesson of our century, than our if it has one. is that human tells us we are. Surely, after Freud, we must admit that our intuitions about naive intuition and our awareness of our own motives often cloudy. ourselves are often over-optimistic, certainty no more Mathematics thinkers are both more complex and less reliable is also a product of human and mathematical thinking, ’ There are non-intultive axioms hut no one believes these statements thought to be. like V = L, or the Proper Forcing Axiom, which do settle such questions. like the way the ordinary axioms of ZFC are to be self evident in anything G. LoForte et al. /Artificial Intelli,qmx 104 (199X) 265-286 ‘85 than any other kind. There is no bedrock of mathematical certainty truth. Even is really the empirical science of the realm, then Popper’s difficulties apply to it just as they do to every science. We and still less to us. Penrose this, for he does not likely to be unassailable on which the edifice of science must be based, no “direct route” to mathematical a Platonist should surely concede Platonic can never be absolutely sure that we have things right, even in mathematics, can we be certain that all mathematical truths will eventually be vouchsafed thinks he knows he is consistent, but he will never be able to establish really know it. He only thinks he knows. that if mathematics 4. Conclusion The GCdel/Turing diagonalization argument is a powerful tool, but it can easily backfire form and power of if used carelessly. As we have shown, arguments with the identical those used by Lucas and Penrose can be used to derive quite ridiculous, even paradoxical, step where conclusions. Somewhere is transformed two senses of a concept are confused with each other, and meta-mathematics into philosophy. But as we have emphasized, where such transformations must be examined very carefully. as this meta-mathematical close to philosophical paradox. reasoning skirts dangerously in these arguments one can always find an illegitimate this area perhaps above all others is one We have located these crucial ambiguities thesis is bound to be illegitimate vision, but with a kind of grandiose self-confidence but our case is in Penrose’s publications, and non-termination results to attack the in this way, since these results are quite thesis. Theorems of the Giidel and Turing kind are not that thought has some kind of magical quality which resists rational description. The broader: any attempt to utilize the undecidability computationalist consistent with the computationalist at odds with the computationalist human picture of the human mind sketched by the computationalist placed on us by GBdel, and predicts restrictions of the kind that Penrose and others find so unacceptable. The tension which Penrose and others perceive arises only if one adds further assumptions, often about the itself, which are already incompatible with nature of truth, human rejected by those the computationalist therefore, working the heavy-duty meta-mathematics thesis accepts the limitations that human abilities are limited by computational in these areas. Whether or not the hypothesis and indeed often have been explicitly is considered acceptable, to the case being made. insight, or computation adds nothing hypothesis, argument properties refers to computations, is stated as a result about computations. it uses. In fact, the only substantive property This point deserves emphasis. The Lucas/Penrose so its reductio conclusion to ask what “computational” computations must have in order for the argument express propositions extremely weak properties, and apply just as well to sentences axiomatizations, themselves to escape from this by hypothesizing field collapse find this plausible, but mention and It is salutary, however, that to be made are that they somehow about integers and that the set of them all is enumerable. These are language, diagrams, or almost any way in which rational agents could express thoughts. Penrose undertakes thoughts arise from quantum [8] and are therefore not enumerable. We do not to which one must the lengths clearly. In our view, they also apply to human that conscious human it here only to emphasize in neuronal microtubules in a well-defined go in order to avoid the power of the argument. And as we have mentioned earlier, the set of all unambiguous so in order to escape the self-referentiality insights that quantum that can never be said. the set of mathematical include some thoughts indeterminacy might provide must apparently of the diagonal construction, that a human mathematician could utter is enumerable, sentences itself informal in some that was; At various sense means that human mathematical stages is consistent in his odyssey, Penrose has assumed and knows know what algorithm to be; that if we were an algorithm, we would thought then that if we were each an algorithm, necessarily and that being describable, the sum total of our thinking would also be algorithmically true and consistent. All of “sound” these extra assumptions are computationally and some can be actually refuted within computational mathematics. His books are full of many other notions which are takes process which computationally that his intuitions are clearly uncomputable decisions); we mention very different from ours. We do not claim to absolutely for, ultimately, about deep issues and the nature of thought. But he has not, and indeed he in the foundations of mathematics them. could not have, established (such as the idea of a well-defined these only to emphasize the differences between us involve controversial refute Penrose’s conclusions; the same as being assumptions implausible, implausible References [ I ] P. Benacermf, God, the Devil. and Giidel, The Monist 5 I (I 967) 9-32. on The Empxv’.v [2] G. Boolos, and others, An open peer commentary New Mind, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13 (4) (1990) 655. [3] J. Glasgow, N. Hari Narayan, B. Chandrasekaran (Eds.). Diagrammatic Reasoning. AAAI Press/MIT Press, Cambridge. MA. 199.5. 141 D. Lewis, Lucas against mechanism, Philosophy 44 (1969) 23 I-233. [S] D. Lewis, Lucas against mechanism [6] J.R. Lucas, Minds, machines, and Code], Philosophy 36 (1961) 120-124. [7] R. Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind, Oxford University Press. New York, 1989. 181 R. Penrose, Shadows of the Mind, Oxford University Press, New York, 1994. [9] R. Penrose. Discussion of Shaclow~.s of the Mind, Psyche 2 (23) (1996); on-line filename: psyche-96-2-23. II, Canad. J. Philos. 9 (1989) 373-376. shadows- I O-Penrose. [IO] H. Putnam. Review of Shadows of’ the Mind, Bull. Amer. Math. Sot. 32 ( 1995) 370-373. 