382DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1982-02592017v20n3p382THEMATIC ESSAY: ETHICS AND POLITICSPluralism, Social Work and an Ethical-PoliticalProject: one theme many challengesValeria Lucilia FortiUniversidade Estadual do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ)Pluralism, Social Work and Ethical-Political Project: One theme, many challengesAbstract: This essay is the result of observations drawn from our decades of experience as a social worker and professor, particularlyof classes in professional ethics in Social Work. It is also based on theoretical studies and qualitative empirical academic research aboutethics/professional ethics and Social Work. The content was partially presented and debated in a lecture at the XV ENPESS. Thearguments seek to deepen the debate about the relationship between pluralism and Social Work. Such a debate is essential to professionalsin the field, since it is linked to the fundamental ethical principles of the current Code of Professional Ethics of Social Workers. It shouldbe noted that there is a sufficient and critical apprehension of the subject by Social Work professionals and students must have anadequate and critical grasp of these issues, particularly considering the present moment when current conservative waves that areexpressed with such importance in the social life of Brazilians and seem to have repercussions in this professional field.Keywords: Pluralism. Social Work. Ethics. Conservatism.R. Katál., Florianópolis, v. 20, n. 3, p. 382-389, set./dez. 2017 ISSN 1982-0259Received on 03.14.2017. Approved on 05.26.2017.Pluralism, Social Work and Ethical-Political Project: One theme, many challenges3831 IntroductionBased on observations from our professional experience as a social worker and professor of socialwork, on theoretical studies and qualitative empiric academic research about ethics and professional ethics andsocial work, this article raises a debate that can be beneficial to the profession. The objective of this article isto contribute to the debate in the profession about this theme, considering what we believe to be relevant,suitable and essential in both a macro-societal sense and in the professional realm of social work. This time ofa conservative retrocession in Brazilian social life in general, which seems to have important repercussions onour professional realm, generates concerns, challenges, conflicts and debates that strive to maintain respect forsocial conquests that Brazilians struggled to attain. For example we cite the Consolidated Labor Laws (CLT)of the Vargas era and the Constitution of 1988, which due to the time passed, should have had significantadvances. Although it may not sound original, we are in a period of Brazilian history when “the obvious needsto be expressed”. This is because of discourses and practices that obfuscate or seek to obfuscate reality, notexpressing their goals and even denominating certain social phenomenon with distinction. This can haverepercussions for social work, particularly if we consider the premises of the current critical professionalproject, because as we know, although they can be realized in different manners, professional projects arerelated to societary projects.2 Pluralism, its basic dimensions and pluralist valuesWe begin with a synthetic reference to the pertinent teachings of professor Carlos Nelson Coutinhoabout pluralism. According to Coutinho (1991), pluralism is supported by two basic dimensions: 1) as a socialand political phenomenon; 2) and as a reference in the construction of knowledge. Although we recognize theimpertinence of separating these dimensions, the fulcrum of our approach is in the second dimension. Moreover,it should be clarified that pluralism is a phenomenon of the modern world, because, according to Coutinho, theGreek world did not know pluralism. In ancient Greece, there was no valorization of the private. The Greekdemocratic experience made possible the existence in Athens of a democratic order, at least for those consideredcitizens – excluding slaves, women and foreigners – but difference was not recognized as something positive,as something similar to what today we call pluralism. This is probably due to how the Greeks understoodsociety and the citizen, that is, they emphasized the public realm in detriment to the private.In modernity, with the rise of the bourgeoisie and the construction of the capitalist world, both the vision ofman and society were altered, introducing an individualist vision of man, in which an exacerbated valorization ofthe individual became essential to the support for a production system based on free competition. Therefore, wefind an important distinction between the ancient world and modernity. For example, the Greek emphasized thevalue of the polis, while in modernity there is an excessive valorization of the individual, based on the premise thatindividuals have inalienable natural rights in society, which is understood as the sum of individual interests, ofprivate interests. In opposition to what was found in the ancient world, when individual differences were lookeddown on, in modernity individualism became valued and fundamental to the liberal concept of the world.Thus, in modernity we are confronted with a defense of the private and the idea of institutional pluralismis considered necessary to limit power. This is because institutional pluralism is seen as a form of limiting power,by understanding that the way to limit one source of power is to create another. In modernity we also find theidea of defense of minorities. In the nineteenth century, the idea of the defense of a minority was seen asindispensable to face threats caused by the expansion of popular participation of workers. The concern forthese threats sparked the hypothesis that the majority, until then seen as a fundamental parameter of liberaldemocracy, could become an oppressor of the interests of individualities and the liberties of minorities. Thisprocess, articulated to other aspects mentioned, gave origin to what according to Coutinho (1991), could becalled pluralist values:a) The conception of conflict as a positive value, that is, the consideration that difference and competitionare positive factors;b) The conception of tolerance as a positive value in face of various opinions, proposals and options;c) The concept of the necessary division of powers as essential to preventing the formation of absolutepower;d) The conception of the right of minorities.These four points refer to the bourgeois order and serve its expansion, they can also serve the expansionof human individuality. They are thus points that serve something that is characteristically incipient in social lifetoday as when they arose.R. Katál., Florianópolis, v. 20, n. 3, p. 382-389, set./dez. 2017 ISSN 1982-0259384Valeria Lucilia FortiWe can also observe that Rousseau, differently than most thinkers of his time, emphasized the publicrealm, displaying a modern line of thinking of a non-individualistic characteristic that focused on the perspectiveof the general will. Rousseau presented the idea of popular sovereignty, distinguishing the general will fromcommon interest, because for Rousseau, the general will does not represent the idea of the will of everyone asa mere sum of individual wills. Nevertheless, despite the richness of the idea of collective will in Rousseau’sthinking, he was critical of the possibility of political pluralism, and even denied the importance of particular/private associations in society, which in the historic epoch that followed his work were essential to popularsovereignty. Thus, we highlight that the expansion of popular participation, which interfered in the formation ofpolitical will, was due to the creation of particular associations, through parties, unions and the opportunity foruniversal suffrage, displaying dissonance with Rousseau’s presumptions. Coutinho (1991, 2011) clarifies thatthis is how what is denominated in Gramscian thinking as civil society became established. That is, with theexpansion of popular participation through parties, unions, etc., the expression of pluralism was no longerrestricted to the individual, becoming an expression of collective subjects. Pluralism is no longer considered onthe individual plane and only as an expression of individual differences that can support individualism andcorporatism. It is also understood to refer to expressions of collective subjects. For this reason, it is necessaryto observe that the fragmentation and pulverization of interests, encouraging individualism and corporatism, areevident obstacles to democracy, but so is despotism because it is an absolute denial of diversity – pluralism.2.1 Pluralism and Social WorkThus, pluralism as a reference in the realm of knowledge is the central point in our approach, whichunderstands that pluralism is part of the sociopolitical dimension, of social projects and their values and goals. Interms of social work, we emphasize that the profession rose with an evident political dimension, given that it isan alternative to the bourgeois interests in support of workers needs at a given moment of capitalism. It can besaid that it is an alternative that distinctly different from direct repression, as from the police, or from charityexercised by religious militancy, in face of the exacerbation of the expressions of the social question in the eraof monopoly capitalism. As vastly promoted in the critical literature of the profession, social work is not a mereconsequence of the qualification, by means of expansion of theoretical knowledge, of actions that utilizephilanthropy and assistentialism to address expressions of the social question. The profession arose as one ofthe responses forged by the state with support from the Catholic Church in function of its project to recuperateCatholicism’s ideological hegemony, which was placed in practice by the encyclicals Rerum Novarum of 1891(presented by Pope Leão XIII) and Quadragésimo Anno of 1931 (of Pope Pio XI). This was a period inwhich the state became more present through systematic and continuous actions in social life. The state wentbeyond merely isolated and episodic responses to the outbreak of class antagonisms and the intensifiedorganization of the working class, which sought to conquer better working and living conditions. That is, thestate became more active in response to the exacerbated expressions of the social question, particularly in theperiod of passage of competitive capitalism to monopoly capitalism, which as Netto (2001, p. 19) explains,“raises to a higher level the totalizing system of contradictions that confer to the bourgeois order its fundamen-tal traces of historic exploitation, alienation and ‘transitoryness’”. There was an expansion of social legislationin general in this period, triggered by capitalist logic, in the form of limited concessions that were understood tobe necessary to respond to the growing worker struggles and protect capitalist domination from the mostintense attacks of workers. This is where social policy is located, the realm of work that is fundamental tosocial workers. Aside from regional differences and highlighting that in Latin America the rise of the professioncannot be understood as a mere prolongation of its origin in Europe and the United States – due to the singularitiesin the distinct areas that correspond to the relations defined by capitalism – we can synthetically characterizethe emergence of Latin American social work as a fruit of the conditions inherent to peripheral and dependentcapitalism and its corresponding forms of expressions of the “social question”. In Brazil, with the so-calledRevolution of 1930 that led Getúlio Vargas to power, the state took the lead in supporting the expansion andconsolidation of the existing industrial bases. Vargas sought the decline of power of the historic agriculturaloligarchy by supporting the construction of bases for the rise of power of the industrial bourgeoisie in Brazil.Thus, the predominance of an economy sustained predominantly by agricultural exports declined in favor of apotential urban-industrial predominance. This process of capitalist expansion threatened the living and workingconditions of those who headed to urban centers in search of survival without the resources needed for theiressential needs. This generated social tensions that triggered the origin of Brazilian social work. Therefore,directing its actions at workers in function of their needs, but in keeping with the bourgeois interests, socialwork had its origin in Brazil, in the 1930s, supported by a set of knowledge aligned to conservative thinking, withan initial highlight for neo-thomism. Thus,R. Katál., Florianópolis, v. 20, n. 3, p. 382-389, set./dez. 2017 ISSN 1982-0259Pluralism, Social Work and Ethical-Political Project: One theme, many challenges385It can be said that for a long period the insertion of social work in social policies contributed to havingcertain working class interests be “refunctionalized” to support a capitalist logic – a professionalalternative that acritically effectivated certain mediations needed for the maintenance of the socialorder, propagating and reinforcing the possibility for mutual collaboration between capital and labor.Therefore, it is not difficult, to understand why acritical and conservative thinking has been nearlyunanimous in the social work profession for so long, nourishing moralizing explanations and positionsin relation to social problems. And, even if we observe a change in this situation in the profession, wecannot affirm that it has been erradicated. When we mention the nearly unanimous existence ofconservatism in the profession over the long term, we must remember the meaning of the CriticalMovement in Social Work that was initiated in the mid 1960s, a process that, although it made somemistakes, certainly allowed important advances in the profession and brought it new theoreticalsupports, even substantially critical ones. (FORTI, 2013, p. 89).Thus, the Latin American Movement for Reconceptualization of Social Work emerged in keeping withthe context of the 1960s and marked an important critical review of the profession, influencing both its theoreticalstandards as well as professional exercise. It was a professional phenomenon in a heterogeneity of countriesand regions that raised various questions about society and the injunctions placed on the work of social workers.It stimulated a distinct positioning, which was critical of social work and the demands made of it, and thus of thecapitalist logic that historically dominated the profession, making viable different theoretical, ethical, technical-operational and ideological-political conceptions. It thus materialized marked differences in our profession. Insum, it can be affirmed that it signified a professional phenomenon that, without having a unidimensionalcharacter, sought to establish bases that would allow going beyond traditional social work, which had beencharacterized by empiricist, palliative, reiterative and bureaucratized practices. It was a movement that, althoughit made mistakes, provided segments of the profession access to critical theoretical supports and as a result,supported alterations in the concepts adopted of man, society and state, generating a different theoreticalreference for the profession. These theoretical references, in varying ways did not limit the analytical contentsand parameters of the professionals solely to the bourgeois ideological horizon. Therefore,Even if we understand that in this process there was no consistent theoretical criticism of the professionalpast, theoretical-practical elaborations developed from the process that broke with the conservativehegemony in the profession. A critical reference arose in relation to bourgeois society that was deepenedand refined and that currently seeks to guarantee values that are aimed at legitimating practices that contributeto assuring working class interests, envisioning the possibility to construct a new social order. The logic ofthis order is not the contradiction between the human genre and the individual, or the primacy given tomercantilization in social life. (FORTI, 2013, p. 92).Notwithstanding all that we have discussed about the profession, it is important to emphasize that if,based on this critical path that involved professional segments, we evaluate the scope of significant advanceson both the intellectual and organizational planes of social work, we cannot affirm that its conservative historywas eradicated. That is, while the origin of the profession helps understand the reason for the predominance oreven the unanimous presence of uncritical, conservative and thinking in the profession, the fact that someprofessional segments took a critical direction does not imply that there was the traditional conservatism waseradicated. Today we find distinct positions, a pluralism and diversity in the profession, and this must be consideredin the realm of professional education and in professional exercise. In particular, we must make theseconsiderations if we intend to support the values and direction inherent to the critical project that, in the professionalrealm, we call the ethical-political project of social work. This means respectful consideration of the currentCode of Professional Ethics of Social Workers, considering that it is an outstanding element, because it refersto the professional exercise, and to the curricular guidelines of the Brazilian Association for Education in SocialWork of 1996 (ABEPSS, 2007), which are fundamental instruments for this project.As responsibilities promoted in our profession, the premise of these curricular guidelines, in relation tothe profile of the desired professional – a professional dotted with a critical, generalist intellectual and culturaleducation – is “the exercise of pluralism as an element particular to academic and professional life, whichrequires debate about the various theoretical trends that compose the production of the human and socialsciences.” (ORTIZ, 2013, p. 18). This premise, however, was changed by the Ministry of Education in theguidelines it approved in 2001, to the “exercise of pluralism as an element particular to academic and professionallife.” (ORTIZ, 2013, p. 18). Moreover, the current Code of Professional Ethics of Social Workers, has 11principles that support (in articulation with each other) number 7: “Guarantee pluralism, through respect forR. Katál., Florianópolis, v. 20, n. 3, p. 382-389, set./dez. 2017 ISSN 1982-0259386Valeria Lucilia Fortiexisting democratic professional lines and their theoretical expressions and commitment to constant intellectualimprovement” (FEDERAL COUNCIL OF SOCIAL WORK - CFESS, 1993, p. 3).For this reason, we must be clear that the approach to pluralism in the dimension of the construction ofknowledge – which as affirmed, does not exclude its possibility as a social and political phenomenon, and this isthe focus of our discussion – cannot be confused with the absence of analytical parameters, or that is, with thepossibility of acceptance of a junction without criteria of theoretical-philosophical lines that are not complementary.We cannot confuse pluralism with the fusion of different matrixes of thinking, indistinctively, or for the analysisor orientation of our professional action in the social reality. Moreover, the idea of relativism is not opportune, asif there was not a truth that could be sought but truths, which of course would be submitted to the possibilitiesand limits of subjects, given that they are constructed by them, signifying mere questions of angles of reasoningand conceptions that they determine.This also reveals the inconsistency of considering as a lack of liberty the selection of a method as aprivileged means in search of truth, which here signifies social reality. It is evident that this selection is based onthe fact of evaluating it as the method that would best allow us to reveal the social reality, which would bestallow us to seek approximation with truth. This is because, for us, there is truth, we evaluate its existence, itshistoric formation, and the possibility for us to approximate it through research, constructing various forms ofknowledge. We are not saying that it is possible to grasp social reality in all its dimensions. We know that socialreality is complex, dynamic and infinitely rich, but to say this does not mean that we cannot desire to comeincreasingly closer to it. It is also not for us to justify skepticism, which concludes that there is no truth,affirming that the alternative to truth is a mere fruit of intersubjective consensus, effectivated by means of pre-established criteria, for example. This allows us to understand that the social reality or the social being can becaptured by means of the movement that allows us, through reason, to extract from objective processes theirintrinsic legality. Therefore, instead of seeking the idea in the idea, making the object analyzed a mere theoreticalconstruction, we reconstruct the process of this object, which is historically given, seeking the idea in the veryobject investigated. In this respect Tonet (1995 p. 48) clarifies that:An ontological approach to the question of knowledge does not begin with the self-examination of reason[...] but seeks the genesis and the direction of knowledge in the complex act that establishes the socialbeing. The being of knowledge is only revealed at its maximum depth in its ontological-practical function. Inthe founding act of the social being, which is labor, it discovers that this is constituted by two poles thatcompose an inseparable unity, the pole of subjectivity and the pole of objectivity, with praxis the moment ofmediation between one and another [...] The transformation of the world, for the resolution of the problemstriggered by human needs, requires, in various degrees, the capture, by consciousness of objectivedeterminations and of causal connections of which the world is composed.All of this reveals that from our perspective reality exists and is not the undiscriminating combination ofdifferent matrixes of theoretical-philosophical thinking that allow us to attain it, as if this would provide us thebest, most efficient way to grasp reality. When we refer to pluralism we are not focusing on relativism in theanalysis of social phenomenon, nor relativism and or eclecticism in the means of grasping these phenomenon.Nor are we suggesting the possibility of neutrality of scholars in the fields related to the human world or theinviability of the debate of distinct positions. To the contrary, we must observe that:Pluralism in the field of the natural or social sciences [...] is synonymous to opening to the different, ofrespect for the position of others, considering that this position, by warning us of our errors and limits, andby providing suggestions, is necessary to the development of our own position, and in general, of science[...] It is a position of opening of those who judge that tolerance is essential to the progress of science, to theenrichment of our own position [...] with the certainty that for each question there is only one globally trueresponse. (COUTINHO, 1991, p.14).We understand this discussion is important in our professional realm, as we said at the beginning. This isquite clear, for example, when we constantly confront professional discourses that affirm a tie with a certainline of critical thinking and with the critical professional project, which, in the professional realm, is denominatedthe ethical-political project of social work. Nevertheless we do not observe a correspondence in professionalaction or a search for this, in the face of this affirmation. We say this, supported by lengthy professionalexperience, as a social worker in the field of teaching and in other realms of social policy, by the results of ouracademic studies and from other studies, particularly in graduate studies in social work (FORTI, 2016; FORTI;GUERRA, 2015). Of course we cannot ignore impediments imposed by working conditions for professionals inR. Katál., Florianópolis, v. 20, n. 3, p. 382-389, set./dez. 2017 ISSN 1982-0259Pluralism, Social Work and Ethical-Political Project: One theme, many challenges387the field, although we can identify, but on a significantly smaller scale, some professional experiences that arecompatible with the critical orientation proposed by this ethical-political project.The idea that the adhesion toThus, we have countless questions about this theme, which we raise here in part, and that we hope willbe increasingly expanded in our professional field. From what we know, it is quite probable that a professionexercised in a democratic social context comports different theoretical-philosophical conceptions in its theoretical-practical foundations and expressions. Nevertheless, this does not imply it is exempt from analytical parametersand or action. Therefore, it is essential that we observe to what degree we are attentive to the fact thatpluralism, which presents itself as one of the main fundaments of our Professional Code of Ethics and as aguide to professional education and exercise, cannot be confused with eclecticism, that is, with the possibility ofindiscriminately combining and even fusing distinctive lines of thought. This would mean defending neutrality inthe field of the sciences that support social work, as if the selection of a given reference was exempt fromimplications in social life and would signify only a mere choice among equivalents, without this representing anyconsequence for professionals, for those they serve, for theprofession and for society in general. It is worth emphasizingthat our current Professional Code of Ethics mentions respectfor the different professional currents, but does not fail to clarifythat this respect is due to democratic theoretical-philosophicalmatrixes and does not consider them to be equivalent. Wemust note that all the fundamental principles, even those thatrefer to pluralism, compose a framework that expresses valuesand orientation to the professional horizon in support of a criticalcontribution that envisions the possibility of going beyond thegiven social order. Moreover, by referring to pluralism we seekto clarify that this aspect does not accept dogmatism orsectarianism, that is, it does not accept the perspective thatsubjects can be intransigent towards points of view that aredifferent from their own, by believing that they detain the truth,without recognizing the importance of seeking to confirm andor improve the understanding of this truth through the debateof ideas with others.professional project, does notcurrent Professional Code ofand the consequent effort forguidelines of ABEPSS, theprinciples and values thatthe materialization of theconstitute the curricularEthic and the criticalrequire adequate andcompatible knowledge,interferes directly in theIn the realm of the sciences, pluralism is synonymouswith opening to the different, given that tolerance to theprogress of science is judged to be fundamental to theenrichment of one’s own position, even knowing that thetruth does not signify an idea constructed by subjects, butsomething that they must grasp, using compatible means.question of pluralism [...]The relation of these arguments with our professionalfield can be easily understood if we consider, for example,that despite significant theoretical and organizational advances,conservatism and other errors in the professional daily work of social workers are recurrent and can representimportant harm to the users of institutions, the profession and society. It is not peculiar for us to mention that there areconstant professional references that attribute the difficulties experienced in the daily work of professionals to thecurrent critical ethical-political project. There are those who allege that this project would only have meaning andcould only be defended if we had better working conditions, as if their existence is not related precisely to professionaland social forces critical of the ruling order and aimed at confronting the obstacles to democratic objectivations,therefore, aimed at countering the degradation of working conditions that support capitalist expansion (FORTI, 2016).It must also be kept in mind, that despite the advances mentioned, there can be struggle in support ofindividual interests and or of particular groups that lead to disparagement of the debate, to disparagement ofthose who have different ideas, as if they represented a danger, a mere adversary that must be refuted oreliminated, even if they belong to the same school of thought. In this respect, we emphasize thatmainly in a competitive society such as ours, where alienation is characteristic, this can occur by merecompetition, using the alibi that there is an essential theoretical-political difference; that is, disqualify theother to win the debate and attain the desired position or any other type of individual interest or that of aparticular group. It is as if commitment to the truth is not necessary, but what is necessary is make effectivea supposed individual success or that of particular groups in an exercise that is commonly consideredpolitically legitimate. (FORTI, 2013, p. 95).R. Katál., Florianópolis, v. 20, n. 3, p. 382-389, set./dez. 2017 ISSN 1982-0259388Valeria Lucilia FortiThe idea that the adhesion to and the consequent effort for the materialization of the principles andvalues that constitute the curricular guidelines of ABEPSS, the current Professional Code of Ethic and thecritical professional project, does not require adequate and compatible knowledge, interferes directly in thequestion of pluralism, given that it is a theoretical-philosophical aspect that, as we said, supposes the professionalcapacity to not fall into relativism, eclecticism and neutrality and or into the reductionism typical to doctrinaireand sectarian positions. It can be said that the comprehension and incorporation of these principles and valuesalso presupposes much more than a mere will or adhesion to propaganda that, as a type of mantra supposes itis sufficient to make the idea a reality.This discussion is important to the supervision of internships as part of their professional education. Thatis, this supervision must provide interns with critical and appropriate knowledge considering the foundations andopportunities for action of the profession. It must expose them to a debate among the various positions at theheart of the profession, revealing the different conceptions of man and society, and therefore, the distinct linesof thinking that are also present in social work, delineating and giving meaning to the work of professional.Supervision is essential to the education of social workers and must be provided by professionals in the field.This is determined in article 5º of Law 8.662, of 7 June, 1993, which regulates the profession, and is assured inthe current Professional Code of Ethics of Social Workers, in its article 4º, letter “e”, that prohibits: “permittingor exercising the supervision of a social work student in public or private institutions that do not have a socialworker on staff who directly accompanies the student intern” (CFESS, 1993, p. 5).The critical literature of the profession clearly expresses that the society in which we live is composedof distinct social forces that maintain contrasting and even antagonistic projects. This has repercussions inthe professional realm. Within the profession we find projects based on different theoretical-philosophical,methodological and technical-operational conceptions, which requires that we study and identify them,develop critical knowledge and conduct permanent debate. This is an important argument about whichsupervisors of interns (those from their school and from the field of the internship) must provide essentialguidance. The interns must have command of this debate, so that they can competently conduct theiractivities, establish conscious goals and options for action that are compatible with them, and so that theycan evaluate the direction taken in the daily work of the institution where they conduct their internship andby its future professionals.Thus, the debate about pluralism is essential to social work, especially when we consider qualifiedprofessional education, as proposed by ABEPSS and when we observe that current threats increase thedifficulties to its implementation. As we said, we are experiencing a period in Brazilian history in which eventhe obvious must be expressed, given the discourses and practices that intend to obfuscate reality. They maydenominate certain social phenomenon in a different mode – which can also be seen in the professional realm,because as we know, even if they arise in different manners, professional projects maintain links with socialprojects. An educational policy is being organized that appears to affirm that the right to higher education canbe democratized by providing an increasingly greater number of openings at private educational institutions anddistance courses. This belief, in addition to not presenting education as a universal right, certainly goes againstthe possibility of assuring what we propose in this debate for our field, which is the development of generalistand critical professionals as determined by the guidelines of the Brazilian Association of Education and Researchin Social Work (ABEPSS, 2007, p. 227).This is indicated by the fact that of Brazil’s 32,878 undergraduate courses offered by institutions of highereducation, only 12.6% are in public institutions and 87.4%, are in private institutions. Among the undergraduateprograms in social work, in 2014 there were only 24 distance courses and 401 classroom courses, but the numberof students concluding the distance courses was higher. We had 13,343 people concluding the courses at 24institutions of distance learning and 12,129 students completing the 401 classroom courses (MARTINS, 2016).3 Final considerationsThe understanding of reality as a synthesis of multiple determinations (which is a concept used repeatedlyin the critical literature of social work) presupposes understanding diversity as a category that is part of ourreality, contrary to attempts to portray illogical homogenizations or hierarchizations. Therefore, to not seediversity as an obstacle but as an expression of real social life allows us to value the exchange of knowledge insearch of substantive understanding. Debate among different positions, distinct types of knowledge, seeking anintellectual enrichment that approximates us to essential knowledge, requires that we go beyond reductionismsand prejudices and idealized attempts at conciliation and homogenization that fog reality and do not allowhistoric ontological knowledge.R. Katál., Florianópolis, v. 20, n. 3, p. 382-389, set./dez. 2017 ISSN 1982-0259Pluralism, Social Work and Ethical-Political Project: One theme, many challenges389Meanwhile, although professional conservatism has not been eradicated, and may even be expanding,there are consistent criticisms that help Brazilian social work to maintain a professional project in which pluralismand professional competence continue to be references. The ethical-political dimension shows that a criticalsegment within the profession is opposed to individualist elitist values based on exploitation and competition.Ever since the reconceptualization movement in social work, a critical professional project has been developedthat defends radically democratic values, guidelines and goals – which are nearly always referred to as theethical-political project of Brazilian social work. It affirms professional goals that are in keeping with valuesarticulated to workers interests. Therefore, grasping the fundaments, the social direction and the purpose of thecritical professional project and the Professional Code of Ethics, in an interventive profession such as socialwork, means grasping the need for a continuing search for intellectual and professional improvement. Itunderstands that the scope of the professional condition, both analytical and interventive, should provide socialworkers the competence to professionally confront inappropriate socio-institutional positions and demands,such as conservative ones that affront democratic values aligned to the interests of those who live from theirown work as well as positions that ignore liberty, human rights and pluralism as an expression of real life. Insum, we defend a professional project that is incompatible with illogical hierarchies and prejudices, whilemaintaining respect for the different existing democratic professional lines and their theoretical-practicalexpressions; and an uninterrupted search for professional improvement. That is, our position reveals elementsthat do not correspond to relativism, to dogmatism or sectarianism, it cannot be confused with eclecticism orneutrality, and cannot involve a theoretical-critical inconsistency or a lack of respect for the hegemonieslegitimately conquered in the professional field.ReferencesASSOCIAÇÃO BRASILEIRA DE ENSINO E PESQUISA EM SERVIÇO SOCIAL. Diretrizes Curriculares do Curso de ServiçoSocial: sobre o processo de implementação. Temporalis, São Luís (MA), v. 7, n. 14, jul./dez. 2007.CONSELHO FEDERAL DE SERVIÇO SOCIAL. Código de Ética Profissional do Assistente Social e Lei 8662/93 que regulamenta aprofissão do Assistente Social. Brasília: CFESS, 1993. Disponível em: <http://www.cfess.org.br/arquivos/CEP_1993.pdf>. Acesso em:12 fev. 2017.COUTINHO, C. N. Pluralismo: dimensões teóricas e políticas. Cadernos ABESS, São Paulo, Cortez, n. 4, p. 5-17, 1991.______. De Rousseau a Gramsci: ensaios de teoria política. São Paulo: Boitempo, 2011.FORTI, V. L. Ética, crime e loucura: reflexões sobre a dimensão ética no trabalho profissional. 4. ed. Rio de Janeiro: Lumen Juris, 2016.______. Considerações sobre o sétimo princípio fundamental do código de ética dos assistentes sociais: o pluralismo em debate. In:CONSELHO REGIONAL DE SERVIÇO SOCIAL-RJ. (Org.). Projeto Ético-Político e exercício profissional em Serviço Social: osprincípios do código de ética articulados à atuação crítica de assistentes sociais. Rio de Janeiro: CRESS, 2013. p. 87-99.______; GUERRA, Y. (Org.). Projeto Ético-Político do Serviço Social: contribuições à sua crítica. Rio de Janeiro: Lumen Juris, 2015.MARTINS, T. S. A centralidade da ética na formação profissional do assistente social: um estudo na graduação em Serviço Social emTeófilo Otoni-MG. 2016. Dissertação (Mestrado em Serviço Social) – Programa de Pós-Graduação em Serviço Social, Universidade doEstado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 2016.NETTO, J. P. Capitalismo monopolista e Serviço Social. 3. ed. São Paulo: Cortez, 2001.ORTIZ, F. G. Notas sobre as Diretrizes Curriculares: avanços, impasses e desafios. In: GUERRA, Y.; LEITE, J. L.; ORTIZ, F. G. (Org.).Temas contemporâneos: o Serviço Social em foco. São Paulo: Outras Expressões, 2013. p. 11-31.TONET, I. Pluralismo metodológico: um falso caminho. Serviço Social e Sociedade, São Paulo, Cortez, v. 16, n. 48, p. 35-57, ago. 1995.Valeria Lucilia Fortivforti17@gmail.comDoutorado em Serviço Social pela Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ)Professora dos cursos de Graduação e Pós-Graduação em Serviço Social da Universidade Estadual do Rio deJaneiro (UERJ)UERJRua São Francisco Xavier, 524, 8º andar, sala 8031 - MaracanãRio de Janeiro – Rio de Janeiro – BrasilCEP: 20.550-900R. Katál., Florianópolis, v. 20, n. 3, p. 382-389, set./dez. 2017 ISSN 1982-0259